



































The Way of Effortless Mindfulness






For	Tom,	my	father,	whose	death	illuminated	my	path.
Maggi,	my	mother,	my	first	teacher	and	inspiration,
who	before	she	passed	on,	set	her	burdens	down
and	fully	embraced	life.	And	to	all	my	teachers
and	students	for	their	love	and	commitment
to	living	an	awakened	and	compassionate	life.



Contents

Introduction

PART	I Discovering

1 The	Next	Stage	of	Mindfulness

2 Discovering	Effortless	Mindfulness

3 Awakening	Glimpse	by	Glimpse

4 Effortless	Mindfulness	Pain	Relief

PART	II Unfolding

5 Three	Hypotheses

6 Practicing	the	Five	Foundations	of	Effortless	Mindfulness

PART	III Abiding

7 The	Ultimate	Medicine	of	No-self	Self

8 How	to	Remain	Awake

9 Glimpsing	All	the	Way	Home



APPENDIX Traps,	Detours,	and	Rerouting	Instructions

Acknowledgments

Notes

List	of	Mindful	Glimpses

Index

About	the	Author

Also	by	Loch	Kelly

About	Sounds	True

Copyright

Praise	for	The	Way	of	Effortless	Mindfulness



M
Introduction

y	 life	 before	 I	 began	 to	 practice	 effortless	 mindfulness	 was
completely	different	from	the	way	it	is	now.	Growing	up,	I	was	neither	calm	nor
contemplative.	 I	struggled	with	some	form	of	dyslexia	and	ADD,	and	I	had	an
underlying	feeling	that	something	wasn’t	quite	right,	that	something	was	missing
or	 out	 of	 balance.	 The	 only	 time	 I	 experienced	 relief	 from	 this	 background
anxiety	 was	 while	 engaged	 in	 sports,	 feeling	 myself	 in	 my	 body	 and	 in	 “the
zone.”	Once,	during	an	ice	hockey	game	in	junior	high	school,	the	score	was	tied
1–1,	and	after	 the	last	 time-out,	I	dropped	into	a	sense	of	well-being,	effortless
focus,	and	connection	with	my	teammates.	 It	was	as	 if	 time	slowed	down,	and
playing	 together	 in	 this	concentrated	way	brought	me	 into	a	profound	sense	of
embodied	 joyful	 flow!	 It	 was	 after	 this	 taste	 of	 effortless	 mindfulness	 that	 I
started	wondering:	How	did	this	happen,	and	could	I	find	a	way	to	intentionally
access	this	joy	of	being	in	other	parts	of	my	life?

As	I	grew	up,	I	became	increasingly	curious	about	and	hungry	for	other	ways
of	 experiencing	 this	 dimension	 of	 life.	 Like	 many	 in	 my	 generation,	 I	 tried
reading	spiritual	books,	traveling,	romantic	relationships,	artistic	pursuits,	being
in	nature,	and	even	sex,	drugs,	and	rock	and	roll	as	I	sought	 lasting	happiness.
My	search	eventually	 led	me	to	graduate	school	 in	psychology	and	spirituality,
where	a	new	door	opened.	I	received	a	travel	fellowship	to	study	at	a	university
in	Sri	Lanka	and	at	meditation	centers	in	India	and	Nepal.	There	I	met	teachers
who	 devoted	 their	 lives	 to	 meditation,	 awakening,	 and	 compassionate	 living.
With	 one	 of	 these	 teachers,	 Tulku	 Urgyen	 Rinpoche,	 I	 was	 introduced	 to	 the
advanced	yet	simple	approach	called	effortless	mindfulness,	which	is	a	different
form	of	mindfulness	from	the	kind	that	is	so	popular	in	the	West	today.	Effortless
mindfulness	is	a	way	of	opening	to	a	natural,	wise,	and	loving	awareness	that	is
already	 present	 within	 us,	 which	 reveals	 qualities	 of	 well-being,	 clarity,	 and
compassionate	action.	It	is	a	way	of	shifting	out	of	the	chattering	mind	and	into
the	source	of	our	mind,	which	is	already	awake	and	aware—where	we	can	rest,



engage,	and	feel	unconditional	love.	Effortless	mindfulness	is	a	unique	form	of
mindfulness	that	allows	us	to	immediately	open	to	clarity	and	love	in	the	midst
of	 our	 busy	 everyday	 lives.	 The	 way	 of	 effortless	 mindfulness	 is	 about	 both
waking	 up	 and	 growing	 up,	 so	 it	 combines	 a	 unique	 meditative	 and
psychological	approach	to	healing	trauma	and	living	an	awakened	life.

Effortless	mindfulness	gave	me	a	way	of	relieving	my	underlying	suffering
and	connecting	to	an	inner	joy	that	I	didn’t	even	know	existed.	My	life	is	freer
and	easier	 than	it	was	before	I	discovered	effortless	mindfulness,	and	for	 this	I
am	deeply	grateful.	One	example	I	can	share	is	that	writing	my	first	book,	with
my	dyslexia	and	ADD,	took	me	ten	years.	Given	the	title	of	this	book,	The	Way
of	Effortless	Mindfulness,	 it	might	 not	 surprise	 you	 that	 I	wrote	 it	 through	 the
practice	of	effortless	mindfulness.	Though	there	was	still	the	pain	of	writing	with
ADD,	this	book	flowed	out	into	form	in	just	nine	months.	The	gift	of	effortless
mindfulness	has	been	finding	a	new	willingness	to	show	up	fully	with	my	quirks
and	struggles.	The	more	I’m	able	to	let	go,	the	greater	the	unconditional,	loving
support	 that	has	appeared	within,	around,	and	 throughout	my	 life.	 I	experience
deeper	 levels	of	vulnerability	and	courage	by	opening	 to	parts	of	myself	 that	 I
avoided	 in	 the	 past.	 I’ve	 been	 able	 to	 feel	 my	 interconnectedness	 with	 other
living	 beings,	 and	 as	 a	 result,	 I’ve	 gained	 a	 new	 level	 of	motivation	 to	 be	 of
service.

Since	my	first	encounter	with	effortless	mindfulness	over	three	decades	ago,
developing	 this	 practice	 within	 myself	 and	 teaching	 it	 to	 others	 has	 been	 my
life’s	inspiration	and	vocation.	This	book	is	meant	to	be	like	a	letter	to	a	friend.	It
is	an	invitation.	I	am	more	of	a	coach	or	a	guide	than	a	preacher	or	a	guru.	I	am
here	to	share	pointers	and	principles	so	you	can	find	effortless	mindfulness	for
yourself,	as	if	to	say,	“Hey,	the	water	is	great!	Come	on	in!	Guess	what?	We	can
awaken	 together!”	 I	 am	 convinced	 that	 accessing	 the	 natural	 well-being	 of
unconditional	 love	is	 learnable	and	teachable	and	hope	this	book	will	help	you
find	what	is	already	yours.

A	Different	Form	of	Mindfulness
Effortless	mindfulness	is	a	unique	form	of	mindfulness.	What	most	people	in	the
West	 know	 as	 mindfulness,	 I	 call	 deliberate	 mindfulness.	 The	 teachings	 of
deliberate	mindfulness	stem	primarily	from	the	Theravada	and	Zen	traditions	of
South	 and	East	Asia	 and	 the	 initial	 practices	 of	Tibetan	Buddhism.	Deliberate
mindfulness	 has	 also	 been	 brought	 into	 secular	 settings	 in	 the	 United	 States



through	 mindfulness	 practices	 for	 physical	 and	 psychological	 treatment	 and
stress	 reduction,	 such	 as	Mindfulness-Based	 Stress	Reduction	 (MBSR).	 I	 love
these	 practices	 because	 they	 provide	 a	 way	 of	 cultivating	 calm,	 patience,	 and
intentional	lovingkindness.	I	have	taught	deliberate	mindfulness	for	decades	as	a
teacher	at	New	York	Insight	Meditation	Center	and	have	seen	the	practice	help
countless	 people.	 I	 deeply	 value	 deliberate	mindfulness	 and	 its	 benefits.	 I	 am
grateful	for	the	popularity	it	is	gaining	in	the	West	because	it	is	allowing	people
to	find	greater	peace	of	mind.

Effortless	mindfulness,	on	the	other	hand,	can	be	considered	a	different	form
of	mindfulness,	which	 is	 sometimes	 taught	after	having	developed	a	deliberate
mindfulness	practice.	It	can	also	be	a	helpful	alternative	approach	for	those	who
have	 had	 difficulty	 with	 concentration	 practices	 or	 sitting	meditation.	 Though
often	 considered	 advanced,	 it	 can	be	 a	good	 starting	place	 for	 people	who	 are
new	to	meditation.	The	effortless	mindfulness	practice	begins	with	an	opening	to
an	already	awake,	optimal	mind	from	which	we	can	be	effortlessly	focused.	The
full	 unfolding	 leads	 to	 a	 life	 that	 is	 not	 more	 detached,	 however,	 but	 more
embodied,	intimate,	courageous,	and	wise.

Effortless	mindfulness	has	its	roots	in	the	world’s	wisdom	traditions	that	are
often	 described	 as	 direct	 path,	 essence	 traditions,	 or	 nondual	 traditions.	 The
premise	 of	 the	 direct	 approach	 in	 all	 meditative	 traditions	 is	 that	 the	 awake
loving	 nature	 we	 are	 seeking	 is	 already	 here	 within	 us	 and	 can	 be	 accessed
immediately.	The	primary	nondual	 tradition	that	 the	effortless	mindfulness	map
and	practices	in	this	book	draw	from	is	called	Sutra	Mahamudra,	which	began	in
North	 India	 and	 links	 the	 three	 main	 traditions	 of	 Buddhism:	 Theravada,
Mahayana,	 and	 Tibetan.	 Sutra	 Mahamudra	 was	 primarily	 a	 movement	 of	 lay
practitioners	who	developed	a	style	of	practice	 to	 facilitate	awakening—a	shift
and	 upgrade	 of	 awareness,	mind,	 and	 identity—in	 the	midst	 of	 everyday	 life.
Effortless	mindfulness	 is	 ideal	 for	 our	 contemporary	Western	 culture	 in	 that	 it
demonstrates	 that	 awakening	 is	 possible	 for	 anyone	 without	 having	 to	 leave
home,	friends,	work,	or	family.

Benefits	of	Effortless	Mindfulness
In	bringing	effortless	mindfulness	into	the	contemporary	Western	context,	I	have
grown	increasingly	interested	in	the	particular	obstacles	and	supports	to	living	a
genuine,	 awakened	 life.	 In	 this	 book,	 I	 present	 a	 way	 of	 working	 with	 the
emotional,	 energetic,	 and	 psychological	 aspects	 of	 our	 human	 experience	 and



identity.	 However,	 this	 book	 isn’t	 about	 the	 philosophy	 of	 consciousness,
mindfulness,	or	awakening.	I	present	a	 theory	and	hypothesis,	but	also	a	set	of
practices	 so	 that	 you	 can	 experience	 the	 results	 for	 yourself.	 I	 have	 included
plenty	 of	 meditations	 that	 are	 direct	 and	 experiential—glimpses	 into	 a	 whole
new	 way	 of	 seeing	 and	 being.	 With	 effortless	 mindfulness,	 you’ll	 uncover	 a
sense	of	well-being	that	relieves	suffering	at	its	root.

Students	 who	 consistently	 practice	 effortless	 mindfulness	 describe	 a	 relief
from	 judgmental	 thinking,	 a	 deep	 sense	 of	 safety	 and	 well-being,	 a	 sense	 of
openness	and	 interconnection,	 and	an	ability	 to	welcome	strong	emotions	with
less	 worry,	 fear,	 and	 shame.	 They	 also	 experience	 more	 compassion	 for
themselves	and	others;	a	greater	motivation,	clarity,	and	optimal	 functioning	at
work;	and	a	new	capacity	for	creativity	and	loving	relationships.

I	 believe	 that	 no	 matter	 where	 you	 are	 on	 your	 life’s	 journey	 or	 in	 your
meditation	 practice,	 you’ll	 find	 something	 of	 benefit	 in	 engaging	 effortless
mindfulness.	 I	 am	 convinced,	 after	 decades	 of	 studying,	 practicing,	 seeing
students’	 progress,	 and	 conversing	 with	 colleagues,	 that	 awakening	 is	 truly
possible	in	the	midst	of	our	everyday	lives.	This	is	possible	because	the	awake
nature	that	we	are	seeking	is	already	here	and	available	within	us.	Awakening	is
part	of	our	common	human	heritage,	spanning	all	traditions	and	cultures.	In	fact,
I	 see	 clear	 indications	 that	 awakening	 is	 the	 next	 natural	 stage	 of	 human
development.	I	have	seen	how	those	who	are	awakening	have	naturally	begun	to
heal,	 teach,	 and	 support	 others,	 which	 seems	 to	 be	 part	 of	 a	 consciousness
revolution.

Many	 of	 us	 are	 concerned	 about	 social,	 political,	 economic,	 and
environmental	 issues	 on	 this	 planet.	 I	 believe	 that	 taking	 responsibility	 to	 find
our	own	true	sense	of	compassionate	interconnectedness,	and	then	helping	others
do	the	same,	can	be	a	radical	collective	healing	that	can	bring	a	better	future	for
all	 of	 us.	 My	 intention	 with	 this	 book	 is	 to	 bring	 a	 particular	 approach	 to
awakening	into	our	world	so	that	it	can	transform	our	lives	and	communities.

The	Flow	and	Structure	of	This	Book
The	Way	of	Effortless	Mindfulness	 is	a	unique,	comprehensive	guidebook	to	an
advanced	 yet	 simple	 form	 of	 mindfulness	 that	 brings	 immediate	 and	 lasting
benefits.	 It	 offers	 a	 systematic	 map	 to	 navigate	 consciousness.	 I	 begin	 by
introducing	ways	of	discovering	an	already	awake	awareness	that	 is	 the	source
of	 your	 mind	 and	 identity	 through	 experimenting	 with	 micro-meditations	 or



“mindful	 glimpses”	 and	 noticing	 the	 results.	 Each	 individual	 will	 find	 that
different	 glimpses	 are	 more	 suited	 to	 them	 than	 others,	 and	 the	 unfolding	 is
equally	unique.

Part	 1	 of	 the	 book	 starts	 by	 introducing	 the	 fundamentals	 of	 effortless
mindfulness.	Then	I	compare	and	contrast	effortless	mindfulness	with	the	more
familiar	deliberate	mindfulness	in	order	to	give	you	a	clear	sense	of	this	lesser-
known	style.	I	go	on	to	introduce	the	Five	Foundations	of	Effortless	Mindfulness
and	 a	 series	 of	 practices	 that	 are	 effortless-mindfulness	 versions	 of	 classical
deliberate-mindfulness	practices	such	as	one-pointed	focus,	lovingkindness,	and
insight	meditation.

Part	 2	 is	 a	 deeper	 dive	 into	 effortless	 mindfulness	 as	 a	 way	 of	 living	 an
awakened	life.	Here	I	point	to	details	of	the	map	of	awakening	and	give	a	series
of	mindful	glimpses	for	each	of	the	Five	Foundations	of	Effortless	Mindfulness.
I	 am	 interested	 in	 offering	 a	 set	 of	 practices	 for	 effortless	mindfulness	 just	 as
there	 are	 standard	 deliberate-mindfulness	 practices.	 Some	 of	 my	 standard
mindful	glimpses	are	also	available	in	my	first	book,	Shift	into	Freedom,	and	in
audio	and	video	form,	so	you	can	listen	to	them	after	you	read	them.

Part	3	offers	ways	of	further	supporting	awakening,	along	with	an	appendix
that	discusses	some	of	the	traps	and	detours	that	prevent	us	from	unfolding	and
embodying	 awakening.	 I	 describe	 the	 integration	 of	 awakening	 and
psychotherapy	and	conclude	with	tools	and	techniques	to	continue	your	journey
of	embodying	effortless	mindfulness.

This	 is	 a	 practice	 book	 to	 help	 you	 not	 only	 understand	 effortless
mindfulness,	but	most	importantly,	to	experience	it	and	embody	it—to	live	from
effortless	mindfulness.	If	you	had	picked	up	a	book	about	how	to	ride	a	bicycle,
intellectual	 explanations	would	not	be	 the	primary	way	 to	 learn,	 and	 the	 same
applies	 here.	 Instead,	 I	 encourage	 you	 to	 adopt	 a	 beginner’s	mind,	 open	 your
heart,	and	enjoy	the	ride.



Part	I
Discovering



M

1

The	Next	Stage	of	Mindfulness

ost	of	us	love	the	feeling	of	effortlessness.	Some	of	the	happiest
times	in	our	lives	happen	when	we	flow	with	the	silent	music	of	life.	The	sight
of	a	dancer,	athlete,	or	bird	moving	with	ease	and	grace	inspires	us.	What	if	you
could	learn	to	shift	into	a	level	of	mind	in	which	suffering	could	be	relieved	and
wisdom,	 love,	 and	 joy	 naturally	 uncovered?	 What	 if	 you	 could	 discover	 a
reliable	way	to	access	a	sense	of	safety	and	open-heartedness	that	shifts	us	out	of
the	confusion	we	have	been	so	 tightly	caught	 in?	What	 if	awakening—shifting
your	consciousness	into	a	more	compassionate	way	of	seeing	and	being—were
something	 you	 could	 learn?	 What	 if	 there	 were	 an	 art,	 a	 science,	 and	 even
repeatable	methods	 to	 live	 from	 effortless	mindfulness?	My	 experience	 is	 that
there	 are!	 This	 reality	 has	 been	 reported	 by	 ancient	wisdom	 traditions	 and	 by
many	people	I’ve	met,	and	it’s	possible	for	you.

Effortless	 mindfulness	 is	 both	 a	 natural	 capacity	 and	 a	 skillful	 way	 to
connect	with	ourselves	and	others.	It	is	a	way	of	being	mindful	from	a	different
level	of	mind	than	we	are	used	to.	There	is	more	to	effortless	mindfulness	than
meditation.	 Effortless	 mindfulness	 is	 primarily	 an	 off-the-meditation-cushion
way	 of	 weaving	 together	 contemplation	 and	 compassionate	 actions.	 Effortless
mindfulness	 begins	 by	 opening	 to	 a	 natural	 spacious	 awareness	 in	 order	 to
become	more	wise,	 embodied,	 and	 creative.	A	 new	 ethical	motivation	 springs
from	the	realization	of	a	loving	interconnection	with	all	of	life.

When	I	teach	effortless	mindfulness,	I’m	often	asked,	“How	do	I	know	when
I’m	 really	 doing	 it?	What	 does	 effortless	mindfulness	 feel	 like?”	 Each	 person
experiences	a	different	facet	of	the	diamond	of	effortless	mindfulness	as	it	shows
its	qualities	 to	us	 freshly	each	 time.	A	glimpse	of	effortless	mindfulness	might
initially	feel	like	any	of	the	following:



• You	feel	relief.

• Your	mind	is	wide	open	and	without	an	agenda.

• Your	thoughts	are	less	prominent	or	have	moved	into	the	background.

• You	are	free	of	worry,	fear,	and	judgment.

• You	are	able	to	effortlessly	focus	on	something,	without	concentrating.

• Your	center	has	moved	from	your	head	to	your	heart.

• You	are	resting	as	a	field	of	seamless	awareness	that	is	outside	and	within
your	body.

• You	feel	aware	from	the	Now	and	able	to	be	aware	of	the	past,	present,	or
future	when	needed.

• Everything	seems	to	be	flowing	easily,	happening	naturally	without	any
effort.

• You	experience	a	sense	of	joy	and	well-being	not	related	to	what	is
happening.

• You	are	aware	from	boundless,	interconnected,	loving	presence	rather
than	a	detached	point	of	view.

• You	feel	aware	from	nonconceptual	awareness	rather	than	thought.

• You	know	all	is	well,	with	nothing	missing	and	nothing	to	push	away.

Introducing	Mindful	Glimpses
One	 of	 my	main	 techniques	 for	 connecting	 and	 experimenting	 with	 effortless
mindfulness	is	through	what	I	call	mindful	glimpses.	Many	people	have	told	me
that	 this	 is	 one	 of	 the	 simplest,	 most	 elegant,	 and	 effective	 ways	 to	 learn
effortless	mindfulness.	A	glimpse	 is	 a	 type	of	 shifting,	 letting	go,	dropping,	or
stopping	 to	 allow	a	natural	 clarity	 and	 connectedness	 to	 emerge.	Glimpses	 are



the	initial	effortless	effort	of	opening,	surrendering,	resting,	or	turning	awareness
around	to	find	our	open	mind	and	open	heart.	They	are	“micro-meditations”	or
“rest	 stops”	 where	 we	 can	 refresh	 or	 reboot	 our	 whole	 body-mind	 system.	 A
glimpse	is	not	an	insight	from	our	conceptual	mind;	it	is	the	direct	experience	of
the	essential	peace,	 love,	and	wisdom	that’s	always	been	here.	It	 is	a	paradigm
shift,	an	identity	shift,	a	shift	of	consciousness	to	a	new	view	and	a	new	you	that
feels	 true.	 In	 Tibetan	 Buddhism,	 glimpsing	 is	 sometimes	 called	 “flashing	 on
awakened	heart-mind.”

A	mindful	glimpse	 is	 similar	 to	 a	Zen	koan,	 a	 simple	 inquiry	 that	 can’t	be
solved	through	logic	and	that	takes	you	out	of	your	conceptual	mind	and	small
self.	 Unlike	 a	 koan,	 a	 glimpse	 does	 not	 start	 with	 thinking.	 It	 starts	 with
awareness	unhooking	from	thought.	The	effortless	mindfulness	glimpses	I	offer
in	this	book	can	be	done	with	eyes	closed	or	open	anytime	during	your	day.	They
initially	take	from	ten	seconds	to	ten	minutes	to	do,	but	they	shift	you	into	a	new
operating	system	that	allows	you	to	enjoy	their	continuous	benefits.	The	primary
way	of	practicing	effortless	mindfulness	is	small	glimpses,	many	times.

You	 can	 see	 glimpses	 as	 invitations	 to	 pause	 and	 shift	 your	 awareness,	 to
have	 a	 chance	 to	 taste	 the	 peace	 beyond	 conceptual	 understanding.	 Several	 of
my	students	have	told	me	that	dropping	into	one	small	glimpse	has	been	as	life
changing	 as	 going	 on	 a	 long	 meditation	 retreat.	 I	 have	 found	 that	 different
glimpses	work	well	for	different	people	depending	on	their	learning	styles.	So	if
one	glimpse	in	this	book	doesn’t	click	for	you,	no	worries.	Just	keep	reading	and
try	the	next	one.

When	we	 do	 traditional	 sitting	meditation,	 it	 can	 take	 a	 long	 time	 for	 the
mind	to	settle.	In	contrast,	here’s	an	example	to	give	you	the	direct	experience	of
the	immediacy	of	a	glimpse.

GLIMPSE Wordless	Awareness

1. Allow	your	awareness	to	move	from	reading	these	words	to	hearing
the	sounds	around	you.

2. Now	shift	from	hearing	sounds	to	an	interest	in	the	open,	objectless
space	all	around.

3. Rest	into	this	alert	wordless	awareness.	



After	you	have	read	the	mindful	glimpses	in	this	book,	I	suggest	you	record	the
ones	you	like	best	in	your	own	voice,	at	a	pace	that	seems	right	for	you,	and	then
listen	to	your	own	voice	lead	you	home.

You	May	Not	Know	That	You	Know	This	Already
When	 I	 describe	 effortless	mindfulness,	 some	 people	 tell	me	 they’ve	 had	 this
feeling	walking	in	nature,	playing	music,	gardening,	making	love,	driving	a	car,
or	during	a	special	moment	in	their	past	that	they	long	to	return	to.	Many	of	us
have	been	intuitively	practicing	some	form	of	effortless	mindfulness	throughout
our	 lives—while	being	creative,	with	 loved	ones,	or	while	playing	sports.	And
some	of	us	have	experienced	it	when	we	suddenly	became	calm	and	clear	during
a	crisis.

For	example,	we	may	have	shifted	 into	effortless	mindfulness	while	hiking
with	friends.	While	hiking,	we	may	notice	that	as	soon	as	we	reach	the	summit
of	 the	 hill,	 our	 goal	 seeking	 stops	 for	 that	 moment.	 Our	 identity	 as	 a	 seeker
relaxes	as	we	look	at	the	sky	and	feel	our	awareness	and	mind	open	into	it.	We
might	 look	at	our	friends	and	feel	a	sense	of	connection	and	open-heartedness.
We	feel	fully	present,	with	no	problems	to	solve	and	nothing	to	push	away.	We
look	at	the	trees	and	feel	connected	and	part	of	nature.	Our	separate	sense	of	self
relaxes	to	reveal	a	wordless	experience	that	rests	 in	a	place	of	“all	 is	well.”	At
times	like	these,	we	feel	freedom,	clarity	of	mind,	joy,	connection	to	nature	and
other	 people,	 and	 a	 sense	 of	 well-being.	 However,	 we	 often	 associate	 these
enjoyable	qualities	with	an	activity	or	place	without	realizing	that	the	source	is
already	available	within	us.

Because	we	 don’t	 always	 know	 that	 the	 source	 of	 our	 joy	 and	 freedom	 is
already	available	to	us,	we	might	later	say,	“I	miss	that	incredible	feeling	I	had
while	hiking	last	week.	I’ll	have	to	wait	until	my	next	vacation	to	return	there.”
Yet,	 if	we	 try	 to	 recreate	 an	 experience	 by	 doing	 the	 same	 activity	 again,	 our
expectation	 may	 keep	 us	 from	 relaxing	 the	 seeking	 mind	 enough	 to	 allow
effortless	mindfulness	to	be	revealed.

Without	 knowing	 it,	 most	 of	 us	 do	 our	 favorite	 leisure	 activities	 to
experience	 effortless	mindfulness	 and	 its	 natural	 qualities	 of	 freedom	 and	 joy.
We	do	what	we	 love	 to	 experience	 effortless	mindfulness.	However,	 effortless
mindfulness	and	its	qualities	are	not	dependent	on	what	we	do	or	where	we	are.
So	 even	 at	work	 or	 in	 the	New	York	City	 subway,	we	 can	 discover	 the	 inner
freedom,	love,	and	clarity	that	are	who	we	truly	are.



GLIMPSE Memory	Door

First,	read	this	mindful	glimpse	below.	Next,	choose	a	memory	of	a	time	you	felt
a	sense	of	freedom,	connection,	and	well-being.	Then	do	this	mindful	glimpse
using	your	memory	as	a	door	to	discover	the	effortless	mindfulness	that	is
already	here	now.

1. Close	your	eyes.	Picture	a	time	when	you	felt	well-being	while
doing	something	active	like	hiking	in	nature.	In	your	mind,	see	and
feel	every	detail	of	that	day.	Hear	the	sounds,	smell	the	smells,	and
feel	the	air	on	your	skin;	notice	the	enjoyment	of	being	with	your
companions	or	by	yourself;	recall	the	feeling	of	walking	those	last
few	yards	toward	your	destination.

2. Visualize	and	feel	yourself	as	you	have	reached	your	goal	and	are
looking	out	over	the	wide-open	vista.	Feel	that	openness,	connection
to	nature,	sense	of	peace	and	well-being.	Having	reached	your	goal,
feel	what	it’s	like	when	there’s	no	more	striving	and	nothing	to	do.
See	that	wide-open	sky	with	no	agenda	to	think	about,	and	then
simply	stop.	Feel	this	deep	sense	of	relief	and	peace.

3. Now,	begin	to	let	go	of	the	visualization,	the	past,	and	all	associated
memories	slowly	and	completely.	Remain	connected	to	the	joy	of
being	that	is	here	within	you.

4. As	you	open	your	eyes,	feel	how	the	well-being	that	was
experienced	then	is	also	here	now.	It	does	not	require	you	to	go	to
any	particular	place	in	the	past	or	the	future	once	it’s	discovered
within	and	all	around.	

Effortless	Mindfulness	Is	Like	a	Flow	State
Effortless	mindfulness	 is	not	only	experienced	during	meditation	or	 relaxation.
When	we	open	into	it,	we	find	a	new	balance	between	being	and	doing.	In	this
age	of	multitasking,	effortlessness	may	 be	 hard	 to	 understand,	 let	 alone	 value.
There	is	a	Chinese	phrase,	wei	wu	wei,	often	translated	as	“effortless	effort”	or
“effortless	 doing,”	 which	 is	 activity	 that	 is	 natural	 and	 in	 harmony	 with
everything.	 In	 Tibetan	 Buddhism,	 effortless	 mindfulness	 is	 sometimes	 called



non-meditation	because	we	discover	the	spontaneous	flow	of	wisdom	and	action.
Effortless	mindfulness	is	compatible	with	an	active,	engaged	life	since	it	can	be
practiced	with	eyes	open,	anywhere.	You	can	look	out	of	your	window	at	work
and,	 in	 a	 few	 minutes,	 shift	 from	 a	 sense	 of	 feeling	 worried	 or	 fearful	 into
effortless	 well-being	 and	 compassionate	 connection.	 You	 can	 return	 to	 your
activity,	now	operating	from	effortless	mindfulness.

You	may	know	a	form	of	effortless	mindfulness	as	“being	in	the	zone”	or	in
a	flow	state.	Flow	is	one	of	the	most	important	areas	of	research	in	contemporary
psychology.	 Many	 of	 us	 consider	 flow	 an	 optimal	 way	 of	 functioning	 while
doing	 complex	 tasks.	 In	 1990,	 psychologist	 Mihaly	 Csikszentmihalyi,	 PhD,
published	his	seminal	book,	Flow:	The	Psychology	of	Optimal	Experience,	based
on	 years	 of	 research.	 Csikszentmihalyi	 and	 his	 team	 studied	 the	 ways	 people
engage	in	sports,	art,	music,	scientific	research,	and	other	tasks	in	order	to	enter
a	state	of	flow.

Csikszentmihalyi	points	to	these	seven	qualities	of	flow:

• Knowing	that	an	activity	is	doable,	that	our	skills	are	adequate	to	the	task

• Being	completely	involved	in	and	focused	on	what	we’re	doing

• A	sense	of	ecstasy

• Great	inner	clarity:	knowing	what	needs	to	be	done	and	how	well	we’re
doing

• A	sense	of	serenity:	no	worries	about	oneself;	a	feeling	of	going	beyond
the	boundaries	of	ego

• Timelessness:	being	thoroughly	focused	on	the	present	so	that	hours	seem
to	pass	in	minutes

• Intrinsic	motivation:	whatever	produces	flow	becomes	its	own	reward1

Most	people	master	the	task	they	are	good	at	to	enter	the	flow	state.	But	in
effortless	mindfulness,	we	 first	 shift	 into	an	 integrated	 flow	state,	 and	 then	we
can	do	any	task	from	heart	knowing.



GLIMPSE From	Your	Heart

1. Pause	.	.	.	notice	your	next	out-breath	.	.	.	then,	with	the	next	in-
breath,	let	your	awareness	move	from	your	head	down	to	your	heart.

2. What	is	it	like	to	know	from	your	heart?	

Introducing	Awake	Awareness
To	practice	any	form	of	mindfulness,	we	shift	our	awareness	and	level	of	mind	to
see	 things	 differently.	Deliberate	mindfulness	 uses	 attention	 and	our	 observing
mind,	whereas	effortless	mindfulness	comes	from	a	particular	level	of	mind	and
awareness	that	is	not	as	familiar.	Among	other	names,	this	unique	level	of	mind
and	 awareness	 has	 been	 called	 source	 of	 mind,	 nature	 of	 mind,	 unity
consciousness,	 natural	 awareness,	 true	nature,	 optimal	mind,	 and	heart-mind.	 I
will	call	this	level	of	awareness	and	mind	awake	awareness.

Awake	awareness	is	the	foundation	of	knowing,	like	the	quantum	field	from
which	 individual	 particles	 of	 thoughts	 or	 waves	 of	 feelings	 appear.	 Awake
awareness	 is	 formless	and	contentless,	yet	knowing.	At	 first,	 awake	awareness
feels	 like	 the	 absence	 of	 thought	 and	 an	 opening	 into	 more	 space.	 Then,	 we
notice	 an	 alertness,	 a	 clarity,	 and	 a	 feeling	 as	 if	 we	 are	 aware	 from	 the	 open
space.	It’s	not	the	same	experience	as	knowing	from	thought,	and	it	does	not	feel
like	“I”	am	aware.	It	is	more	as	if	we’ve	shifted	into	an	awareness	that	is	already
awake	by	itself,	without	our	help.	This	is	why	it	is	called	awake	awareness.

Here’s	a	deeper	look	at	what	awake	awareness	is	and	isn’t:

• Awake	awareness	is	our	primary	level	of	knowing,	which	is	prior	to
thinking,	includes	thinking,	and	is	also	beyond	thinking.

• Awake	awareness	is	not	an	altered,	transcendent,	or	even	a	meditative
state.	It	is	not	attention,	and	it’s	not	mindful	awareness;	neither	is	it
mindlessness	or	zoning	out.

• There	are	many	types	of	consciousness	(patterns	of	experience)	such	as
emotional	consciousness,	hearing	consciousness,	and	thinking
consciousness.	Awake	awareness	is	what	makes	consciousness	conscious.
Thoughts,	feelings,	and	sensations	are	dancing	patterns	made	of	awake



awareness.

• Awake	awareness	is	clear	and	open,	resting	as	peace	of	mind,	while
trusting	that	information	or	insight	will	come	when	needed.

• Awake	awareness	is	the	same	in	all	of	us,	yet	our	individuality	arises
from	it.	Rather	than	looking	to	our	thoughts,	memories,	personality,	or
roles	to	identify	ourselves,	through	effortless	mindfulness	we	come	to
know	awake	awareness	as	the	primary	dimension	of	who	we	are.	Once
we	experience	awake	awareness	as	the	foundation	of	our	identity,	we
experience	our	conditioned	thoughts,	emotions,	and	sensations	as	waves
within	the	ocean	of	our	life.

• Awake	awareness	cannot	be	harmed	by	any	strong	emotional	state.	In
other	words,	awake	awareness	is	the	source	from	which	all	emotional
states	arise	and	are	experienced.	We	don’t	have	to	leave	or	change	our
feelings	to	find	essential	well-being.

• Awake	awareness	is	nonconceptual,	invisible,	formless,	boundless,	and
timeless,	yet	it	is	our	optimal	level	of	knowing	and	the	foundation	of	our
identity.	It	is	experienced	in	those	times	when	we	peek	beyond	the	veil	of
our	conventional	experience	and	notice	the	silence	that	is	the	fabric	of	our
everyday	reality.

• Awake	awareness	unfolds	into	open-hearted	awareness,	and	then	the
natural	qualities	of	well-being,	compassion,	and	intuitive	intelligence	are
revealed.

Awake	awareness	is	 the	most	 important	discovery	we	can	make	on	our	path	of
effortless	mindfulness.	However,	 in	 this	 approach,	 awake	 awareness	 is	 not	 the
end	goal,	and	we	do	not	seek	to	remain	in	a	detached	witness	state	or	a	state	of
pure	 awareness.	 Instead,	 awake	 awareness	 will	 unfold	 into	 awake	 awareness-
energy	embodied	and	into	open-hearted	awareness.	Similarly,	as	we	will	explore
later	in	this	book,	effortless	mindfulness	could	be	called	“effortless	mindfulness
embodied”	or	“effortless	heart	mindfulness”	as	we	learn	to	live	an	awakened	life.



GLIMPSE Background	Awareness

1. Take	one	slow,	deep	breath.

2. Let	out	a	sigh.

3. Now,	let	your	awareness	open	to	discover	the	background	awareness
that	is	already	effortlessly	awake	and	aware	without	your	help.

4. Notice	that	you	can	effortlessly	focus	from	this	background
awareness.	

The	practice	of	effortless	mindfulness	begins	as	a	simple	shift	or	letting	go	to
discover	 a	 naturally	 awake	 awareness	 that	 is	 already	 present	 all	 around	 and
within	us.	One	of	my	students	described	the	experience	like	this:	“I’m	not	aware
of	an	open	mind	and	an	open	heart.	I’m	aware	from	an	open	mind	and	heart	that
is	connected	to	everything.”	When	we	tap	into	this	feeling	of	viewing	from	our
wordless	awake	awareness,	it	opens	us	to	a	relief	from	suffering,	natural	joy,	and
compassionate	connection	with	people	and	the	world	around	us.

We	have	been	taught	 that	our	 intelligence,	 identity,	and	safety	are	based	on
developing	and	being	centered	in	thought-based	knowing,	or	what	I	will	call	our
small	mind.	 When	 we	 shift	 from	 our	 small	 mind	 to	 awake	 awareness	 as	 the
source	of	mind,	we	discover	that	we	are	already	effortlessly	mindful.	Effortless
mindfulness	 is	 the	 way	 of	 knowing,	 creating,	 and	 relating	 from	 awake
awareness.	Although	effortless	mindfulness	begins	by	 letting	go	of	everything,
we	ultimately	become	embodied,	energetic,	loving,	and	fully	human.

GLIMPSE Eyes	of	Awareness

1. With	a	soft	gaze,	simply	see	what	is	here	in	front	of	you.

2. Notice	the	awareness	that	is	looking	through	your	eyes.

3. Now	close	your	eyes	and	notice	the	same	awareness	that	was
looking	out	is	still	here.



4. Simply	rest	as	this	wordless	awareness,	which	is	now	aware	of
itself.

5. Without	creating	a	thinker,	be	the	awareness	that	welcomes	and
includes	everything.	

Why	We	Haven’t	Discovered	Our	Greatest	Natural	Gift
You	might	be	asking:	If	awake	awareness	as	the	source	of	effortless	mindfulness
is	 already	here,	why	haven’t	 I	discovered	 it	yet?	This	 is	 a	good	question.	One
reason	we	don’t	discover	 it	 is	 that	we	don’t	have	awake	awareness	on	most	of
our	Western	psychological	maps.	Many	people	who	have	longed	and	strived	to
be	 free	 of	 suffering	 have	 missed	 awake	 awareness,	 not	 because	 they	 lacked
desire	or	commitment	but	because	they	didn’t	know	what	to	look	for	or	where	to
look.

The	 Shangpa	 Kagyu	 tradition	 of	 Tibetan	 Buddhism	 gives	 four	 insightful
reasons	we	don’t	naturally	discover	awake	awareness,	which	I	find	quite	helpful:

1. Awake	awareness	is	so	close	that	you	can’t	see	it.

2. Awake	awareness	is	so	subtle	that	you	can’t	understand	it.

3. Awake	awareness	is	so	simple	that	you	can’t	believe	it.

4. Awake	awareness	is	so	good	that	you	can’t	accept	it.

Let’s	take	a	closer	look	at	each	of	these:

1. “So	close	that	you	can’t	see	it”	means	that	awake	awareness	is
hidden	in	plain	sight.	It	is	closer	than	our	own	breath.	We	can’t	find
awake	awareness	because	awake	awareness	is	not	an	“it.”	Awake
awareness	is	neither	an	object	nor	thing	that	can	be	seen,	heard,
touched,	smelled,	or	tasted.	It	isn’t	a	thought,	emotion,	image,
belief,	feeling,	or	even	energy.	Awake	awareness	is	invisibly
inherent	within	us	and	is	where	we’re	looking	from.	We	need	to
learn	how	to	have	awake	awareness	look	within,	turn	around,	or	rest
back,	so	that	awake	awareness	can	discover	itself.	Then,	awake
awareness	is	the	source	of	mind	from	which	we	are	able	to	perceive.



2. “So	subtle	that	you	can’t	understand	it”	means	we	can’t	know	awake
awareness	with	our	thinking	mind.	Neither	the	five	senses,	the
thinking	mind,	the	ego,	the	will,	the	imagination,	nor	attention	can
know	awake	awareness.	Just	as	the	eye	cannot	hear	sounds,	thinking
and	attention	cannot	know	awake	awareness.	Only	awake	awareness
can	know	awake	awareness.	Awake	awareness	is	experiential.	It	is	a
more	direct	way	of	knowing	that	is	beyond	thought	or	prior	to
thought,	although	it	can	utilize	thought	when	needed.	What	you’ll
discover	as	you	do	mindful	glimpses	is	how	to	separate	awake
awareness	from	our	thinking	mind	and	have	awake	awareness	know
directly,	without	using	conceptual	knowing.

3. “So	simple	that	you	can’t	believe	it”	because	once	it’s	discovered,
awake	awareness	is	natural	and	not	complex.	The	only	thing	that
makes	it	seem	difficult	is	that	it’s	unknown—until	it’s	discovered.
Many	people	who	are	looking	for	spiritual	fireworks	are	surprised
when	the	“aha!”	holds	no	drama.	However,	you	feel	free	of
suffering,	free	from	worry	about	worry,	free	from	fear	of	fear,	and
free	from	anger	at	anger.	This	simplicity	is	why,	in	Zen	Buddhism,
awake	awareness	is	often	called	“ordinary	mind.”

4. “So	good	that	you	can’t	accept	it”	because	you	didn’t	need	to	earn	it,
develop	it,	or	be	good	enough	to	get	it.	It’s	hard	to	believe	that	the
well-being,	innocence,	and	basic	goodness	that	you’ve	been	looking
for	is	who	you	truly	are.	Awake	awareness	is	deeper	than	any
shame-based	feelings	or	long-held	beliefs	of	being	worthless,
wrong,	bad,	stupid,	or	unlovable.	You	can	begin	to	feel	an	inherent
sense	of	safety	and	support	that	you	had	previously	been	looking	for
in	things,	people,	and	achievements.	It	relieves	you	of	the	pressure
to	try	to	do	things	perfectly	or	become	somebody	someday	so	that	in
the	amorphous	future	you	will	be	okay.	Discovering	awake
awareness	as	the	source	of	mind	and	the	foundation	of	our	identity
is	such	a	precious	feeling	that	some	people	have	tears	of	joy	upon
finally	feeling	it:	you	get	to	come	home	to	who	you	have	always
been.



GLIMPSE The	Peace	Within

What	is	here	now	if	the	peace	you	are	seeking	is	already	here?	

Awakening	as	the	Next	Natural	Stage	of	Human	Development
The	way	of	effortless	mindfulness	is	one	approach	to	living	from	awareness	and
compassion.	Effortless	mindfulness	begins	as	a	meditation	practice	but	becomes
a	holistic	way	of	sustaining	our	most	optimal	way	of	 living—the	shift	 that	has
traditionally	been	called	awakening.	 It’s	a	 term	shared	by	many	religions,	used
by	 spiritual	 teachers,	 and	 studied	 by	 historians.	 In	 the	 introduction,	 I	 defined
awakening	 as	 “a	 shift	 and	 upgrade	 of	 awareness,	 mind,	 and	 self.”	 A	 fuller
definition	of	awakening	is	moving	from	our	current,	limited	mind	and	small	self
to	 a	 new,	 upgraded	 operating	 system	 of	 optimal	 mind	 and	 expansive,
interconnected	Self.

The	term	awakening	is	an	apt	one	because	people	who’ve	had	the	experience
report	 that	 it	 resembles	 waking	 from	 a	 dream.	 We	 spend	 much	 of	 our	 lives
sleepwalking	while	hoping	the	project	of	improving	and	developing	our	separate
sense	of	self	will	help	us	feel	happy	and	connected.	When	we	wake	up	from	this
daydream,	we	may	be	surprised	to	realize	that	our	limited	perspective	is	only	a
small	part	of	a	vaster	reality.

Awakening	may	seem	 like	a	distant,	unattainable	goal	or	 a	 lofty	challenge,
but	 it’s	 no	more	 unreachable	 than	 any	 other	 stage	 of	 learning	 and	 growth	 that
you’ve	 already	 lived	 through.	 Awakening	 is	 not	 limited	 to	 those	 who	 join	 a
monastery,	live	in	a	cave,	or	are	Olympic	athletes	of	meditation.	After	working
with	 thousands	 of	 meditation	 students	 and	 psychotherapy	 clients	 as	 well	 as
colleagues	who	teach	meditation,	neuroscience,	and	developmental	psychology,
what	 I’ve	 learned	 is	 this:	 awakening	 is	 the	 next,	 natural	 stage	 of	 human
development.

There	 are	 many	 ways	 to	 awaken.	 Some	 are	 spontaneous	 and	 may	 occur
during	a	time	of	great	peace	and	connection	with	a	beloved	or	with	nature.	Some
occur	during	a	 time	of	heartbreak	and	hopelessness,	and	more	 than	one	person
has	 told	 me	 that	 as	 they	 were	 having	 a	 breakdown	 they	 had	 a	 breakthrough.
However	it	happens,	the	small	mind	and	small	self	reach	their	limits,	and	awake
awareness	shines	through.	Effortless	mindfulness	is	a	practice	that	leads	to	and
supports	awakening.

Initially,	we	wake	up	 from	 the	small	mind	and	small	 sense	of	 self	and	 into
awake	 awareness	 as	 the	 boundless	 ground—the	 unity	 of	 the	 infinite	 and	 the



finite.	 Then,	 we	 wake	 into	 an	 embodied,	 interconnected	 feeling	 of	 flow	 and
being	home.	Then,	we	wake	out	to	natural,	creative,	and	compassionate	activity
and	relationship	with	others.

I	believe	 that	 awakening	 is	 a	natural	 stage	of	human	development	and	 that
we	 need	 to	 humbly	 and	 honestly	 share	 stories	with	 each	 other	 about	 our	 own
growth	 in	 this	 regard	 so	 that	we	can	open	 the	conversation	and	normalize	 this
concept	in	our	culture.	For	me,	initial	awakening	was	a	radical	shift	to	uncover
an	essential	dimension	of	well-being,	a	feeling	that	everything	is	ultimately	okay,
that	who	 I	 essentially	 am	 is	okay.	This	 realization	 is	 nothing	 like	 imagination,
belief,	or	a	 temporary	meditation	state.	Although	awake	awareness	is	 invisible,
the	knowing	that	“all	 is	well”	is	as	real	and	intimate	as	the	feeling	of	my	body
breathing.	What	 is	 revealed	with	awakening	 is	 a	 sense	of	 interconnection	with
everyone	 and	 a	 realization	 that	 we	 are	 essentially	 the	 same.	 It	 feels	 like
unconditional	 love,	 as	 if	 there	 are	 no	 circumstances	 that	 could	 change	 this
emotion.	The	new	view	is	from	a	tenderhearted	presence	that	is	here,	even	when
challenging	 things	 are	 happening.	 Over	 the	 years,	 with	 consistent	 practice	 of
effortless	mindfulness,	this	foundation	of	freedom,	well-being,	and	unconditional
love	 has	 become	 the	 new	 normal	 for	 me	 and	 many	 of	 my	 colleagues	 and
students.	With	practice,	it	can	become	yours	as	well.

The	 way	 of	 effortless	 mindfulness	 is	 practiced	 through	 small	 glimpses	 of
awake	awareness	as	a	way	to	fine-tune	our	consciousness	in	the	midst	of	our	day.
When	we	get	caught	in	thought,	we	can	“learn	to	return”	and	“train	to	remain”	as
our	 awakened	 nature.	 After	 a	 series	 of	 small	 glimpses,	many	 times,	 effortless
mindfulness	 becomes	 “second	 nature.”	 We	 trust	 the	 feeling	 of	 knowing	 and
talking	from	what	feels	like	a	continuous	intuition.	We	“know	by	heart”	without
the	paralysis	of	analysis,	like	gliding	down	a	hill	on	a	bicycle	with	our	hands	off
the	handlebar.

GLIMPSE How	to	Do	Not-Doing

Can	you	let	go	into	the	awake	awareness	that	is	resting	deeper	than	sleep,	yet
wide	awake?	

On	Our	Way	to	Effortless	Mindfulness
As	in	any	learning	process,	there	are	obstacles,	traps,	or	points	of	difficulty	that



everyone	encounters.	One	of	them	is	our	doubt,	thinking	something	like,	“Other
people	are	getting	it,	but	I’m	not.”	However,	the	interesting	thing	about	effortless
mindfulness	is	that	your	doubting	part,	your	sincere	effort–making	part,	and	your
thinking	mind	will	 never	 get	 it.	 If	 you	 think,	 “I	will	 never	 get	 this,”	 in	 some
ways	you	are	correct	because	the	“I”	that	is	trying	to	“get	it”	can’t.

If	you	had	never	ridden	a	bicycle,	I	could	describe	how	to	ride:	put	your	left
leg	on	the	left	pedal,	then	swing	your	right	leg	over	the	bike,	push	off,	and	begin
to	move	before	you	put	your	foot	on	the	right	pedal,	and	then	pedal	as	you	try	to
balance	and	keep	your	hands	steady	on	the	handle	grips.	It	can	make	some	sense,
but	 it’s	 only	 when	 you	 get	 on	 the	 bicycle,	 start	 riding,	 and	 get	 a	 feel	 for	 it
yourself	that	you	will	know	balance	and	effortless	riding.

Ultimately,	you	don’t	need	to	 intellectually	understand	how	to	do	effortless
mindfulness	any	more	than	you	need	to	understand	the	physics	behind	how	your
body	 balances	 when	 you	 ride	 a	 bicycle.	 You	 need	 only	 to	 shift	 into	 awake
awareness	as	the	place	of	knowing.	From	there,	the	knowing	will	teach	itself.

Try	the	following	mindful	glimpse	to	experience	these	teachings	more	fully.

GLIMPSE Relax	the	Problem	Solver

To	begin	this	glimpse,	start	from	wherever	you	are.	Notice	the	sense	of	“me”	that
is	here	now.	Notice	the	feeling	of	having	a	sense	of	self	as	a	doer	or	problem
solver.	The	small	sense	of	self	keeps	its	centrality	by	being	a	problem	solver.	It
can	be	helpful	in	solving	everyday	problems,	but	it	is	mainly	trying	to	solve	the
problem	of	identity,	which	it	can’t	do.	This	manager	part	is	usually	felt	within
your	body	looking	out	of	your	eyes.	Notice	the	location,	shape,	size,	and	feeling
of	this	“me”	that	is	trying	to	be	helpful	and	undertake	this	mindful	glimpse.	It
usually	has	thoughts	and	worries	like,	“Am	I	doing	it	right?”	or	“I	don’t	think	I
will	get	it,”	or	“How	do	I	do	this?”

The	goal	is	not	to	escape	everyday	problems,	situations,	or	issues	that	need
to	be	dealt	with.	Instead,	experience	what	it’s	like	to	step	out	of	the	problem-
solver	identity:	relax	this	manager	and	notice	what’s	here.	When	awareness
looks	directly,	notice	what	changes.	What	is	absent	and	what	new	qualities	arise?
What	is	the	new	feeling	of	what	or	who	is	here?

1. With	open	or	closed	eyes,	ask	yourself:	What	is	here	now	when	there
is	no	problem	to	solve?



2. Let	your	awareness	unhook	from	the	problem	solver,	drop,	open,
feel	within	and	all	around.	Who	is	here?	What	is	aware?	What	is
here	when	there	is	nowhere	to	go	and	nothing	to	do?	Nothing	to
know	or	create	or	become?	What	is	here,	just	now,	when	you	are	not
the	problem	solver?	What	is	here	when	you	are	not	orienting	by
thought,	you	are	not	going	down	to	sleep,	and	you	are	not	going
back	to	daydream?	Just	feel;	what	is	this?

3. Now,	ask	yourself:	What’s	aware	now,	when	there	is	no	problem	to
solve?

4. Feel	the	qualities	that	arise.	What’s	absent	that	was	here	a	few
minutes	ago?	What	natural	qualities	are	here	now?

5. Where	are	you	aware	from?	What	is	this	feeling	of	being?

6. Now,	from	fresh	beginner’s	mind,	inquire:	What’s	here	now	when
there’s	no	problem	to	solve?	

In	the	next	chapter,	we	will	look	more	closely	at	what	is	unique	about	effortless
mindfulness	 by	 comparing	 it	 with	 the	 more	 well-known	 form	 of	 deliberate
mindfulness.



I

2

Discovering	Effortless	Mindfulness

n	general,	mindfulness	can	be	defined	as	a	way	of	being	conscious	of	our
internal	and	external	experiences,	of	being	engaged	and	related	 to	what	we	are
doing.	 The	 opposite	 of	mindfulness	 is	mindlessness:	 being	 distracted,	 spaced-
out,	or	impulsive.	It’s	doing	things	without	thinking	about	them,	not	being	clear
about	 our	 words	 or	 actions.	 Mindfulness	 is	 a	 basic	 human	 capacity	 and	 has
become	 part	 of	 contemporary	 Western	 culture	 as	 we	 have	 joined	 millions	 of
people	around	the	world	who	have	been	practicing	mindfulness	for	millennia.

Mindfulness	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 important	 things	 we	 can	 discover	 for	 our
health	 and	 happiness,	 and	 over	 the	 past	 twenty	 years,	 empirical	 research	 has
repeatedly	 shown	 that	 it	 reduces	 stress-related	 symptoms,	 anxiety,	 depression,
and	 chronic	 pain	 as	well	 as	 improving	 cognitive	 function,	 boosting	 immunity,
and	lowering	blood	pressure.	Mindfulness	is	now	taught	in	schools,	community
centers,	 hospitals,	 gyms,	 prisons,	 and	 businesses.	 Gradually,	 mindfulness
meditation	as	a	basic	tool	of	healthy	living	is	becoming	as	routine	as	eating	well,
exercising,	and	getting	enough	sleep.

When	I	look	back	at	my	life,	I	realize	my	mindfulness	training	began	when	I
was	 quite	 young,	 while	 playing	 sports	 and	 doing	 art	 projects	 in	 elementary
school.	My	first	formal	meditation	instruction	was	in	Transcendental	Meditation
(TM)	when	 I	was	 sixteen.	During	college,	 I	practiced	Christian	contemplation,
attended	Quaker	meetings,	and	went	on	a	Zen	retreat.	When	I	attended	graduate
school	 for	 a	 master’s	 degree	 in	 psychology	 and	 spirituality,	 I	 traveled	 to	 Sri
Lanka,	 India,	 and	 Nepal	 on	 a	 fellowship	 to	 study	 varieties	 of	 meditation	 and
healing.	 It	 was	 during	 that	 year,	 over	 three	 decades	 ago,	 that	 I	 was	 fortunate
enough	to	be	 introduced	to	both	deliberate	and	effortless	mindfulness.	 I	started
by	spending	six	months	at	the	University	of	Peradeniya	near	Kandy,	Sri	Lanka,
and	 in	 monasteries	 and	 meditation	 centers	 practicing	 vipassana,	 or	 insight



meditation,	from	the	Theravada	Buddhist	tradition,	all	forms	of	meditation	that	I
call	“deliberate	mindfulness.”

Later,	 I	 traveled	 to	 India,	where	 I	 heard	 the	Dalai	Lama	give	 a	public	 talk
about	direct	path—or	essence—traditions	in	Tibetan	Buddhism,	called	Dzogchen
and	Mahamudra.	 He	 taught	 that	 the	 love	 and	 freedom	we	 all	 seek	 is	 already
equally	within	all	of	us,	and	there	are	ways	to	directly	realize	awake	awareness
as	their	source.	I	was	so	moved	by	his	teaching	that	I	enthusiastically	raised	my
hand	and	asked	who	I	could	study	this	direct	path	with.	He	suggested	a	teacher,
Tulku	Urgyen	Rinpoche	in	Nepal.	I	changed	my	plans	and	traveled	by	train,	bus,
and	 plane	 to	meet	with	 him	 at	 his	 hermitage	 on	 the	 slopes	 of	 the	Kathmandu
Valley.

It	was	through	this	teacher	that	I	first	heard	the	term	effortless	mindfulness.
In	 his	 book	Rainbow	Painting,	 Tulku	Urgyen	 Rinpoche	writes	 that	 “there	 are
two	 types	 of	 mindfulness:	 deliberate	 and	 effortless.”1	 He	 described	 effortless
mindfulness	 as	 a	 simple	 yet	 advanced	 form	 of	 mindfulness.	 He	 taught	 that
effortless	mindfulness	is	the	path	to	realizing	and	living	from	our	nature	of	mind
(awake	awareness).

In	 Tibetan	 Buddhism,	 rigpa	 is	 the	 word	 for	 “nature	 of	 mind,”	 or	 awake
awareness.	Its	opposite	is	marigpa,	or	“not	rigpa,”	which	is	the	root	of	suffering.
The	cause	of	suffering	is	failure	to	recognize	awake	awareness,	and	the	solution
to	 suffering	 is	 in	 realizing	 and	 living	 from	 awake	 awareness.	 The	 shift	 into
awake	awareness	is	what	makes	effortless	mindfulness	possible.

When	 I	met	with	Tulku	Urgyen	Rinpoche,	 he	was	 sixty-one	years	 old	 and
had	 completed	 three	 separate	 three-year	 retreats	 in	 his	 lifetime.	 However,	 he
explained	 that	 his	 uncle	 and	 teacher	 had	 shown	 him	 how	 to	 directly	 access
effortless	mindfulness	when	he	was	eleven	years	old,	and	he	said	 that	what	he
had	 experienced	 through	 the	 practice	 when	 he	 was	 young	 and	 what	 he
experienced	through	those	years-long	retreats	seem	to	be	exactly	the	same.2	He
shared	 that	 this	was	one	of	 the	 reasons	he	offered	direct	practices	of	effortless
mindfulness	 to	 those	who	might	be	 interested	and	ready	 to	access	 their	natural
source	of	mind	immediately.

When	 Tulku	 Urgyen	 Rinpoche	 first	 gave	 a	 small	 group	 of	 us	 effortless
mindfulness	instructions,	it	took	only	a	few	minutes.	Yet	I	became	as	calm	and
clear	as	after	my	ten-day	deliberate	mindfulness	meditation	retreats	in	Sri	Lanka.
But	 it	was	also	a	different	 type	of	calm.	 I	 felt	 alert,	 compassionate,	 embodied,
and	 energetically	 connected	 to	 everyone	 and	 everything.	 My	 emotions	 were



more	accessible	and	spacious,	and	I	 related	 to	 them	directly	 in	a	 loving	way.	 I
began	to	laugh	as	tears	of	gratitude	flowed	down	my	face.	The	pervasive	feeling
of	anxiety,	self-centeredness,	and	fear,	which	had	always	felt	like	a	normal	part
of	who	I	was,	dissolved.	What	was	here	instead	was	a	profound	sense	of	well-
being,	unity,	 joy,	and	gratitude.	This	full	expression	lasted	through	the	day	and
had	 faded	 a	 bit	 when	 I	 awoke	 the	 next	 morning,	 but	 it	 remained	 in	 the
background,	and,	more	importantly,	something	fundamental	had	changed	in	me.

Deliberate	and	Effortless	Mindfulness
Because	effortless	mindfulness	is	a	less	familiar	approach	for	most	Westerners,	it
may	 be	 easier	 to	 understand	 it	 in	 contrast	 with	 the	 more	 familiar	 deliberate
mindfulness,	 which	 is	 now	 so	 widespread	 that	 it	 is	 what	 most	 people	 call
“mindfulness.”	Most	of	the	mindfulness	books,	centers,	and	teachers	in	the	West
have	come	from	the	Theravada	and	some	Zen	traditions.

In	my	own	journey	from	the	Theravada	tradition	in	Sri	Lanka	to	the	Tibetan
tradition	in	Nepal,	I	could	see	these	were	different	approaches	to	meditation.	It’s
important	to	say	that	both	of	these	traditions	have	the	same	goal	of	awakening;
they	 are	 simply	 different	 paths	 up	 the	 same	 mountain.	 I	 started	 with	 good
training	in	deliberate	mindfulness,	and	I	am	glad	I	had	this	period	of	deliberate
mindfulness	practice	because	I	benefited	from	the	wonderful	 teachers	I	studied
with.	 Because	 of	 this	 experience	with	 both	 traditions,	 I	 am	 able	 to	 help	most
people	 start	 their	 meditation	 practice	 with	 either	 deliberate	 or	 effortless
mindfulness.	 I	 refer	 those	who	do	not	 resonate	with	 the	 effortless	mindfulness
approach	 to	 insight	 meditation	 or	 Zen	 meditation	 centers	 to	 learn	 forms	 of
deliberate	 mindfulness.	 Just	 as	 my	 friends	 and	 colleagues	 have	 generously
translated	and	brought	deliberate	mindfulness	to	our	culture,	I	would	like	to	offer
a	 contemporary	 approach	 to	 effortless	 mindfulness	 to	 help	 people	 relieve
suffering.

The	 word	 effortless	 isn’t	 simply	 modifying	 what	 is	 usually	 understood	 as
mindfulness—like	easy	listening	or	instant	coffee.	We	aren’t	being	asked	to	try
to	 be	 effortless.	 (Trying	 to	 be	 effortless	 can	 be	 quite	 an	 effort!)	 Effortless
mindfulness	 does	 not	mean	 that	 there	 is	 not	 an	 initial	 effort.	We	 learn	 how	 to
make	 an	 initial	 effort	 to	 shift	 out	 of	 our	 small	 mind	 to	 find	 an	 effortless
awareness	that	is	already	here.	It	is	also	called	“effortless”	because	mindfulness
becomes	spontaneously	sustaining.

Effortless	mindfulness	 involves	 as	much	unlearning	 as	 learning	 to	 uncover



our	 natural	 well-being.	 The	 goal	 of	 effortless	mindfulness	 is	 not	 to	 escape	 or
transcend	 but	 to	 live	 a	 fully	 intimate	 human	 life.	 The	 immediate	 goal	 of
effortless	mindfulness	 is	 to	 transition	 into	 the	new,	upgraded	operating	system,
which	is	embodied	and	open-hearted	and	has	greater	capacity	to	be	with	our	full
human	experience.	One	student	of	mine	reported,	“I	am	feeling	a	deep	sense	that
all	is	well,	that	who	I	am	is	okay.	It’s	not	that	there	are	not	difficulties	and	pain,
but	now	I	feel	a	loving	support	within	that	gives	me	new	motivation.”

In	deliberate	mindfulness,	we	 intentionally	cultivate	a	 loving	attitude,	calm
our	 small	 thinking	 mind,	 and	 then	 observe	 our	 thoughts	 and	 feelings.	 In
effortless	mindfulness,	we	shift	out	of	our	small	thinking	mind	into	the	source	of
mind,	which	 is	 already	calm,	 focused,	 interconnected,	 and	compassionate.	The
radical	discovery	is	that	the	freedom,	clarity,	and	natural	love	we	seek	are	always
right	 here.	 This	 natural	 awareness	 does	 not	 have	 to	 be	 created	 but	 simply
uncovered.	We	don’t	have	to	believe	our	shame-based	stories	and	culture	that	we
are	 unworthy	 and	 unlovable.	 Instead,	 the	 report	 from	 those	 who	 have	 looked
within	 using	 effortless	mindfulness	 is	 that	 basic	 goodness	 is	 the	 foundation	 of
who	we	 are.	 On	 the	 level	 of	 our	 essential	 nature,	 there	 is	 nowhere	 to	 go	 and
nothing	 to	 develop.	 The	 practice	 of	 effortless	 mindfulness	 is	 learning	 how	 to
discover,	uncover,	realize,	or	awaken	to	this	hidden	foundation	of	who	we	are.

In	 the	 Mahamudra	 tradition,	 the	 practices	 of	 deliberate	 mindfulness	 are
usually	 taught	 in	 the	 beginning.	 However,	 effortless	 mindfulness	 can	 also	 be
taught	first,	for	those	who	are	drawn	to	it.	I	have	found	it	takes	about	the	same
amount	 of	 time	 to	 learn	 as	 deliberate	 mindfulness,	 and	 when	 you	 begin	 with
effortless	mindfulness,	you	still	get	all	the	benefits	of	deliberate	mindfulness.

To	 look	 more	 closely	 at	 the	 difference	 between	 these	 two	 kinds	 of
mindfulness,	 consider	 a	 widely	 accepted	 definition	 of	 deliberate	 mindfulness
from	 Jon	Kabat-Zinn,	 one	 of	 the	 important	 teachers	 to	 help	 bring	mindfulness
into	contemporary	culture:

Mindfulness	means	paying	attention	in	a	particular	way:	on	purpose,
in	the	present	moment,	and	nonjudgmentally.3

Here	is	my	definition	of	effortless	mindfulness:

Effortless	mindfulness	is	letting	go	of	thoughts,	present	moments,	and
attention—opening	to	a	naturally	compassionate,	nonconceptual
awake	awareness	that	is	interconnected	here	and	Now.



When	 we	 compare	 these	 two	 types	 of	 mindfulness,	 we	 see	 that	 there	 are
several	 significant	 distinctions	 between	 deliberate	 mindfulness	 and	 effortless
mindfulness:

• In	effortless	mindfulness,	rather	than	“paying”	attention,	we	are	letting	go
of	attention	to	receive	another	kind	of	awareness,	namely	awake
awareness.

• In	effortless	mindfulness,	rather	than	paying	attention	“on	purpose,”	we
are	relaxing	the	goal-oriented	mindful	meditator	to	discover	a
nonconceptual	awake	awareness	that	is	aware	and	focused	without	our
help.

• In	effortless	mindfulness,	rather	than	starting	by	concentrating	or
narrowing	focus	“in	a	particular	way”	on	an	object	like	our	breath,	we	are
opening	to	awareness	as	the	object	and	the	subject,	to	discover	a
spacious,	contentless	awareness	from	which	we	are	mindful.	Rather	than
taming	the	horses	of	our	mind	in	a	small	enclosure,	we	are	opening	the
gate	to	the	field	of	spacious	awake	awareness.

• When	we	shift	into	effortless	mindfulness,	rather	than	trying	to	create	a
“nonjudgmental”	attitude,	we	discover	that	awake	awareness	is	not	just
neutrally	nonjudgmental	but	is	a	naturally	compassionate	dimension	of
who	we	are.

• Rather	than	“paying	attention”	to	an	object	from	a	detached	mindful
witness,	effortless	mindfulness	feels	intimately	and	energetically
interconnected	with	what	we’re	aware	of.	Effortless	mindfulness	is	aware
of	our	body,	emotions,	and	thoughts	from	within	and	all	around.

• Deliberate	mindfulness	practice	actively	cultivates	the	attitude	of
lovingkindness,	whereas	in	effortless	mindfulness,	we	discover	a	natural
lovingkindness	that	is	already	here.	This	discovery	of	natural
lovingkindness	is	the	foundation	of	a	new	motivation	for	compassionate
activity	that	is	not	based	on	external	rules	but	comes	from	the	direct
experience	of	interconnection	with	all	of	life.

From	 the	perspective	of	 effortless	mindfulness,	you	can’t	be	 in	 the	present



moment.	 Rather	 than	 paying	 attention	 “in	 the	 present	 moment,”	 effortless
mindfulness	 is	 being	 aware	 of	 present	 moments	 coming	 and	 going	 here	 and
Now.	 This	 is	 a	 big	 difference,	 not	 trying	 to	 be	 in	 the	 moment	 or	 even	 just
watching	the	changing	moments	that	arise	and	pass.	The	Now	is	not	the	present
moment.	The	Now	is	not	the	present	time,	either.	The	Now	is	timeless	time	that
is	aware	of	past,	present,	and	future.	The	Now	does	not	come	and	go	and	treats
past,	present,	and	future	as	similar	relative	experiences.	So,	in	the	Now,	we	can
be	aware	of	the	coming	and	going	of	present	moments	while	we	make	plans	for
the	future	or	recall	the	past.

Remembering	Who	We	Are
The	origin	of	the	word	mindfulness	comes	from	a	word	in	the	Pali	language,	sati,
which	 is	 translated	 literally	 as	 “remembering.”	 In	 deliberate	 mindfulness,	 it
means	 remembering	 to	 return	 our	 attention	 to	 the	 object	 of	 meditation,	 like
breath,	 when	 attention	 wanders.	 Attention	 is	 defined	 by	 Merriam-Webster	 as
“the	act	or	state	of	applying	the	mind	to	something.”4	You	can	apply	your	small
mind	 to	your	breath	or	 a	 task,	but	 eventually	 the	 small	mind	will	wander,	 and
you	will	become	distracted.	Maintaining	continuous	attention	is	difficult,	not	just
because	the	attention	does	not	remain	stable	but	because	the	small	mind	is	not	a
stable	 entity.	American	 psychologist	William	 James	 agreed:	 “There	 is	 no	 such
thing	 as	 voluntary	 attention	 sustained	 for	more	 than	 a	 few	 seconds	 at	 a	 time.
What	is	called	sustained	voluntary	attention	is	a	repetition	of	successive	efforts
which	bring	back	the	topic	to	the	mind.”5

Deliberate	mindfulness	is	being	attentive	from	our	small	mind	or	a	mindful
witness;	 it	 requires	us	 to	 continuously	 return	 to	 the	 task—re-remembering	 and
refocusing.	The	reason	we	lose	focus	when	we	try	 to	be	mindful	 is	not	 lack	of
willpower.	We	lose	focus	because	the	small	mind	we’re	looking	from	is	always
moving	and	changing.	In	deliberate	mindfulness,	we	must	continuously	reapply
ourselves	 to	 the	 task	at	hand	by	actively	remembering	not	only	 to	 focus	but	 to
recreate	a	“focuser”	identity	in	our	mind.

In	 effortless	 mindfulness,	 sati	 (mindfulness)	 is	 a	 different	 kind	 of
remembering.	Effortless	mindfulness	is	a	remembering	of	our	true	nature—who
we	have	always	been.	In	effortless	mindfulness,	we	don’t	have	to	pay	attention
from	our	small	mind	because	we	are	aware	from	awake	awareness,	or	source	of
mind,	which	is	not	made	of	moving	thoughts.	We	can	feel	in	a	flow	with	a	wider



context	but	also	a	feeling	of	being	grounded	and	not	overwhelmed	by	the	things
that	are	happening.	A	client	told	me,	“I	feel	grounded,	but	it’s	interesting	because
the	 supportive	 ground	 is	made	 of	 awareness.	 From	 here,	 I	 feel	 interconnected
and	 effortlessly	 focused.	 And	 that	 gives	 me	 a	 sense	 of	 deep	 safety	 and	 well-
being.”

Rather	 than	 cleaning	 up	 and	 calming	 the	 stormy	 clouds	 of	 our	mind	 first,
effortless	mindfulness	starts	with	recognizing	awake	awareness,	which	is	already
naturally	 calm	 and	 clear.	 Then	 we	 can	 return	 to	 our	 stormy	 problems	 or
challenges	with	a	new	perspective	and	sense	of	well-being.	The	benefit	of	this	is
that	 awake	 awareness	 is	 the	 only	 thing	 that	 can	 truly	 bear	 that	which	 seemed
unbearable.	When	we	are	mindful	from	our	awake	awareness,	we	have	effortless
focus,	which	is	not	distracted	by	thoughts,	feelings,	or	sensations.	This	is	often
what	students	first	report	upon	learning	effortless	mindfulness:	“I	feel	open	and
connected	 without	 anything	 able	 to	 distract	 my	 focus.”	 The	 conceptual	 small
mind	doesn’t	become	wiser,	nor	can	the	calm,	focused	small	mind	know	awake
awareness.	With	effortless	mindfulness,	we	learn	to	shift	out	of	small	mind	into
awake	awareness,	which	already	has	a	calm,	compassionate	clarity.

GLIMPSE Awake	Awareness	Knows	Without	Using	Thought	or	Attention

In	this	glimpse,	instead	of	focusing	on	what	we	are	aware	of,	we	will	have
awareness	be	aware	of	itself.	This	may	be	something	that	has	never	crossed	your
mind.	In	learning	about	using	awareness	instead	of	attention,	we	will	look	back
to	the	source	of	mind,	awake	awareness,	and	then	focus	from	here.	Instead	of
following	the	flashlight	of	attention	out	to	the	movie	screen	of	experience,	we
see	if	we	can	feel	awareness	directly.	We	have	learned	to	experience	life	as	a
subject	looking	at	objects,	even	internal	objects	like	thoughts	and	emotions.	One
helpful	practice	of	deliberate	mindfulness	is	called	“mental	noting.”	In	mental
noting	practice,	our	mindful	witness	becomes	more	precise	by	labeling	thoughts,
feelings,	and	sensations	as	they	arise.	In	this	mindful	glimpse,	we	will	let	go	of
labeling	and	instead	learn	to	trust	the	intelligence	of	awake	awareness.	Now	we
will	have	awareness	feel	what	awareness	is	like	when	it	is	both	the	subject	and
the	object.	It	will	be	helpful	to	have	this	invisible,	contentless	awareness	know
itself	as	we	separate	the	awareness-based	knowing	from	thought-based	knowing.

1. To	begin,	simply	close	your	eyes	while	allowing	your	awareness	to



remain	open.	Feel	your	breath	moving	within	your	body.	Feel	your
whole	body	from	within	while	noticing	your	breathing	happening	by
itself	for	three	breaths.	Be	easy	and	comfortable.	Relax	while
remaining	alert.

2. Take	a	moment	to	see	what	is	here	now.	Notice	how	your	body	is
feeling.	Is	it	uncomfortable,	comfortable,	agitated,	relaxed,	tired,	or
neutral?	Just	be	aware	of	your	body	without	trying	to	change	it.	Just
be	aware	of	it	as	it	is.

3. Now	simply	notice	what	is	aware	of	these	feelings	and	sensations.
Feel	the	awareness	in	which	these	sensations	are	happening.	Rather
than	being	aware	of	sensations,	feel	the	awareness	that	is	aware.
Notice	that	the	awareness	is	not	tired,	is	not	in	pain,	is	not	agitated	or
anxious.	Feel	how	this	awareness	is	with	your	body.

4. Now	notice	the	activity	of	your	mind	and	thoughts.	Just	be	aware	of
whether	your	thoughts	are	agitated,	calm,	tired,	emotional,	anxious,
or	neutral.	Without	changing	anything	at	all,	allow	your	mind	and
thoughts	to	be	as	they	are.

5. Now	notice	the	space	in	which	thoughts	are	moving.	Be	interested	in
the	awareness	instead	of	the	thoughts.	Shift	to	notice	not	just	the
content	but	the	context.	Feel	the	awareness	that	is	aware.	Notice	how
awareness	allows	your	mind	to	be	as	it	is	without	changing	anything.

6. Begin	to	notice	that	awake	awareness	is	alert,	clear,	and
nonjudgmental.	Feel	the	awareness	that	is	not	tired,	anxious,	or	in
pain.	Notice	that	awake	awareness	is	all	around	and	inherent	within
your	body	and	within	your	mind.	Instead	of	being	identified	with	the
states	of	your	body	or	mind	or	trying	to	accept	or	change	them,
simply	become	interested	in	what	is	aware.

7. What	is	awareness	like	that	is	already	accepting	of	things	as	they	are
—right	here	and	now?	Notice	the	awareness	of	the	next	sound	you
hear.	Does	awareness	have	a	location	or	size?	What	is	it	like	to	be
aware	of	experiences	from	this	pain-free,	spacious	awareness?



8. Now	simply	rest	as	the	awareness	that	is	aware	of	your	thoughts	and
sensations.	Hang	out	as	awareness	without	going	up	to	thought	to
know	or	down	to	sleep	to	rest.	Be	the	awareness	that	welcomes	your
sensations	and	thoughts.	Ask	yourself:	Am	I	aware	of	this	spacious
awareness?	Or	What’s	it	like	when	I’m	aware	from	this	spacious
awareness,	which	is	welcoming	thoughts,	feelings,	and	sensations?
Notice	that	the	awareness	is	aware	from	all	around	and	from	within
—spacious	and	pervasive.

9. Just	let	go	of	focusing	on	any	one	thing.	Be	aware	of	everything
without	labeling.	Feel	that	your	awareness	is	no	longer	knowing
from	thought.	Feel	what	it	is	like	to	be	aware	from	awareness,	which
includes	your	thoughts	and	sensations	from	head	to	toe.

10. Simply	let	be	and	remain	uncontracted	and	undistracted,	welcoming
without	effort.	

Two	Levels	of	Mind
One	simple	way	to	distinguish	the	two	types	of	mindfulness	is	 to	say	that	 they
are	 both	 being	 mindful	 but	 from	 different	 levels	 of	 mind.	 This	 is	 important
because	 what	 you	 can	 be	 mindful	 of	 depends	 on	 what	 level	 of	 mind	 you’re
mindful	from.	In	effortless	mindfulness,	it	 is	not	as	important	to	focus	on	what
thoughts	and	emotions	are	arising	but	rather	to	ask,	“Who	or	what	level	of	mind
are	 they	arising	 to?”	In	effortless	mindfulness,	we	shift	 from	focusing	on	what
we	 are	 aware	 of	 into	 focusing	 on	 awareness	 itself—moving	 from	 a	 detached
observer	and	into	a	view	from	interconnected	awake	awareness.

In	deliberate	mindfulness,	we	are	aware,	from	our	mindful	witness,	of	things
arising	 and	 passing.	 Effortless	 mindfulness	 invites	 us	 to	 be	 more	 intimately
interconnected	with	our	experience	and	all	that	is	happening.	This	begins	when
we	 shift	 out	 of	 both	 our	 conceptual	 mind	 and	 our	 mindful	 witness	 and	 into
awake	 awareness.	 Deliberate	 mindfulness	 focuses	 on	 the	 contents	 of
consciousness,	while	effortless	mindfulness	turns	back	to	be	aware	of	the	context
—awareness	 itself.	With	 deliberate	mindfulness,	we	 discover	who	we	 are	 not.
With	effortless	mindfulness,	we	discover	who	we	essentially	are.

Effortless	mindfulness	 does	 not	 lead	 to	 being	 detached	 from	 emotions	 but
rather	to	both	feeling	more	vulnerable	and	to	having	more	capacity	to	be	tender



and	welcoming	of	all	feelings.	The	radical	reports	from	my	students	are	that	our
essential	nature	is	loving,	joyous,	and	free	of	worry,	and	we	just	need	to	untie	the
knots	of	conditioning	to	reveal	these	natural	qualities.

One	 student	who	came	 to	 a	daylong	 retreat	was	 a	dance	and	yoga	 teacher,
originally	trained	in	Russia	as	a	ballerina.	She	said	she	had	never	before	done	a
practice	like	effortless	mindfulness.	Near	the	end	of	the	day,	after	doing	a	variety
of	effortless	mindfulness	glimpses,	she	said,	“I	am	crying	with	joy	because,	for
the	 first	 time	 in	 my	 life,	 I	 am	 able	 to	 intentionally	 feel	 fully	 embodied.	 This
feeling	 of	 being	 aware	 of	 my	 body	 from	 within	 and	 from	 everywhere	 only
happens	once	in	a	while.	Embodiment	is	not	just	being	in	my	body,	but	feeling
connected	 to	everything	and	everybody.	 It	 is	what	 I	 love	most	about	yoga	and
dance,	and	I	chase	it,	but	I	never	knew	how	to	access	it	directly	until	now.”

Leaving	the	Witness	Protection	Program
In	deliberate	mindfulness,	after	an	initial	stage	of	calming	our	chattering	mind,
we	 establish	 a	 mindful	 witness	 to	 observe	 thoughts,	 feelings,	 and	 sensations.
Insight	meditation	can	lead	to	an	important	insight	that	“I	am	not	my	thoughts,
beliefs,	stories,	or	a	thought-based	identity.”	This	is	what	I	call	the	mindful	move.
The	mindful	move	 helps	 us	 get	 a	 healthy	 distance	 from	 being	 identified	with
emotions	 and	 thoughts.	 For	 example,	we	may	 feel	misunderstood	 by	 a	 family
member	and	respond	with	defensive	anger	only	to	realize	that	we	misunderstood
what	they	said.	The	mindful	move	can	allow	just	enough	space	to	ask	a	question
that	can	bring	clarity	to	you	and	the	relationship.	We	see	that	there	is	not	a	solid
mind	and	not	a	solid	separate	self,	made	of	thoughts,	by	observing	thoughts	like,
“I	am	thinking	this	thought.”	This	helps	us	take	thoughts	less	personally.

Many	people	seek	mindfulness	training	because	of	suffering	caused	by	being
too	attached.	Some	people	who	come	to	my	workshops	for	the	first	time	say	they
are	 too	 identified	with	 their	 thoughts	 and	 feelings:	 “I	wake	 up	 every	morning
immediately	 worried	 about	 work,	 then	 get	 involved	 in	 dramas,	 which	 causes
more	stress.”	Or,	“I	feel	like	I’m	hypersensitive	to	other	people’s	moods	and	take
on	 their	 feelings.”	 We	 make	 the	 mindful	 move	 to	 a	 detached	 witness	 with
deliberate	 mindfulness.	 Establishing	 this	 mindful	 witness	 brings	 relief	 from
being	 overidentified,	 which	 is	 an	 important	 step.	 However,	 the	 danger	 of
stopping	at	this	level	of	a	detached	witness	is	that	we	may	end	up	isolated,	as	if
in	 a	 “witness	 protection	 program.”	 One	 student	 said,	 “I	 was	 good	 at	 being
mindful	of	activities	from	my	birds-eye-view,	but	I	began	to	feel	I	lost	my	flow



and	became	more	aloof,	mental,	and	robotic,	like	Spock	from	Star	Trek.”
Here,	there’s	still	a	subtle	dualism	of	“observer”	and	“observed”	that	gives	us

a	 feeling	 of	 freedom	 from	 attachment	 while	 maintaining	 a	 feeling	 of	 looking
down	from	a	distant	 tower	at	our	body,	mind,	and	the	world.	The	unique	thing
about	 effortless	 mindfulness	 is	 that	 the	 first	 shift	 is	 to	 look	 back	 through	 the
meditator	 to	 even	 further	 disidentification	 as	 we	 open	 to	 vast,	 timeless,
nonconceptual	 awake	 awareness.	 The	 unfolding	 of	 effortless	 mindfulness
continues	to	become	aware	simultaneously	from	outside	and	within,	so	we	feel	a
natural	interconnection	and	intimacy	with	everything	without	being	reidentified.

The	Effortless	Mindfulness	Research
Deliberate	mindfulness	has	two	main	styles	of	practice:	shamatha,	translated	as
“calm	abiding,”	and	vipassana,	translated	as	“insight	meditation.”	First,	there	is
calming	 and	 focusing	 of	 the	 small	 mind	 in	 calm	 abiding.	 Next	 are	 insight
meditation	 practices,	 like	 the	 Four	 Foundations	 of	 Mindfulness	 (which	 I’ll
explain	in	the	next	chapter),	where	we	establish	a	mindful	monitor	to	witness	the
contents	of	consciousness.

It	 is	 now	 accepted	 in	 the	 field	 of	 mindfulness	 research	 to	 refer	 to	 calm
abiding	 as	 focused	 attention	 (FA)	 and	 the	 insight	 meditation	 practice	 as	 open
monitoring	 (OM).	 Recently,	 a	 third	 type	 of	 mindfulness,	 nondual	 awareness
(NDA),	has	been	included	in	mindfulness	research	studies.

The	term	nondual	is	one	of	the	best	ways	to	describe	effortless	mindfulness.
The	 Sanskrit	 word	 for	 nonduality	 is	 advaita,	 which	 means	 “not	 two.”	 It	 is
pointing	to	the	view	that	the	dualistic	way	of	perceiving—inside	versus	outside,
subject	versus	object,	and	other	versus	self—is	not	 the	only	 level	of	 reality.	 In
Buddhism,	nondual	 is	defined	as	“two	 truths,”	meaning	 that	ultimate	 reality	as
formless	 awake	 awareness	 and	 everyday	 relative	 reality	 are	 experienced
simultaneously.	 Some	 people	 define	 nonduality	 as	 “oneness”	 or	 “pure	 awake
awareness”	because	it	 is	beyond	dualistic	 thought.	Here,	nonduality	means	that
the	 dualistic	 relative	 reality	we	 experience,	 of	 separate	 energies	 and	 things,	 is
made	 of	 awake	 awareness.	 So	 awake	 awareness	 and	 appearances	 are	 not
essentially	two	different	things.

Nonduality	begins	with	a	recognition	of	a	transcendent	dimension	of	reality
—awake	 awareness—and	 then	 sees	 this	 as	 the	 foundation	 of	 our	 everyday
dimension	of	 reality.	So	when	we	shift	 into	nondual	awareness,	we	experience



objects	 both	 as	 interconnected	 and	 as	 a	 unique	 expression	 simultaneously.
Nondual	 awareness	 is	 another	 way	 of	 describing	 the	 view	 from	 effortless
mindfulness.	Here	are	three	descriptions	that	might	be	helpful	to	understand	the
difference	 in	 these	 three	 stages	 of	mindfulness.	 Focused	 attention	 (FA)	 is	 like
looking	down	from	a	tower	to	the	river	of	your	breath.	Open	monitoring	(OM)	is
like	 looking	from	an	open	sky	 to	 thoughts,	 feelings,	and	sensations	as	separate
objects,	like	clouds	and	birds,	coming	and	going.	Nondual	awareness	(NDA)	is
like	being	the	entire	ocean	of	awareness	that	is	also	arising	as	the	unique	wave	of
your	body	while	feeling	an	interconnected	flow	with	everything.	For	this	reason,
I	often	call	effortless	mindfulness	nondual	mindfulness.

In	one	research	study,	conducted	in	2012	at	New	York	University	by	Zoran
Josipovic,	 PhD,	 and	 his	 research	 team,	 experienced	 practitioners	 of	 effortless
mindfulness	 were	 asked	 to	 shift	 into	 nondual	 awareness	 while	 receiving	 a
functional	magnetic	 resonance	 imaging	(fMRI)	scan.6	 I	am	familiar	with	 these
important	results	because	I	was	one	of	the	subjects	in	this	study.	We	were	asked
to	do	 focused	attention	practices,	 open	monitoring	practices,	 and	 then	nondual
awareness	 practices.	 The	 results	 showed	 dramatic	 differences	 in	 the	 brain
between	the	different	practices,	as	I	will	explain	below.	The	NDA	practices	I	did
while	 in	 the	 fMRI	 machine	 were	 the	 effortless	 mindfulness	 practices	 that	 I
present	in	this	book.

The	study	looked	at	our	brain’s	two	primary	networks:	the	externally	focused
task-positive	 mode	 and	 the	 internally	 focused	 default	 mode.	 During	 goal-
oriented	activity,	the	default	mode	network	is	deactivated,	and	the	task-positive
network	 is	 activated.	 When	 we	 are	 daydreaming,	 creatively	 imagining,	 or
thinking	 about	 a	 situation,	 our	 internal	 network	 is	 activated,	 and	 our	 external
network	 is	 deactivated.	 Our	 brain	 continuously	 and	 rhythmically	 alternates
between	 these	 two	 networks,	 which	 leads	 to	 a	 feeling	 of	 distraction.	We	 can
notice	 this	when,	for	 instance,	we	are	standing	 in	 line	and	realize	our	attention
goes	outward	to	what’s	going	on	in	the	room	and	then	shifts	to	become	aware	of
something	we’re	thinking	about.	We	are	not	intentionally	doing	this;	our	brain	is
alternating,	and	our	attention	follows.

One	 insight	 from	 Josipovic’s	 study	was	 that	 one-pointed	 focused	 attention
(FA)	tends	toward	“suppression	of	the	activity	of	the	default	network.”7	FA	and
OM	 each	 suppress	 one	 of	 the	 two	 brain	modes.	While	 suppressing	 one	mode
gives	us	relief,	we	cannot	function	for	long	from	just	one	mode.	If	we	are	only
focused	on	monitoring	our	inner	world	(OM),	we	cannot	complete	daily	tasks;	if



we	are	only	mindful	of	outer	 tasks	 (FA),	we	can	become	unaware	of	our	 inner
life	 and	 lose	 the	 creativity	 that	 comes	 from	 free	 association	 and	 creative
thinking.	 Josipovic	writes	 that	 “NDA	meditation	 is	 different	 from	FA	and	OM
meditations	 in	 that	 it	 enables	 an	 atypical	 state	 of	mind	 in	which	 extrinsic	 and
intrinsic	 experiences	 are	 increasingly	 synergistic	 rather	 than	 competing.”
Effortless	 mindfulness	 balances	 the	 activity	 of	 the	 default-mode	 network	 and
task-positive	network	so	that	we	are	equally	aware	of	what	we’re	doing	and	our
internal	 state.	 Awake	 awareness	 is	 aware	 of	 what	 happens	 both	 inside	 and
outside.

We	don’t	want	to	completely	shut	down	the	default-mode	network	because	it
has	 positive	 aspects,	 including	 giving	 us	 the	 ability	 to	 imagine,	 free-associate,
and	think	creatively.	These	advanced	creative	abilities	distinguish	us	from	other
creatures	as	 they	enable	us	 to	 imagine	 future	outcomes	and	plan	 for	 them—an
evolutionary	 advantage	 that	 we	would	 lose	 if	 we	were	 to	 repress	 the	 default-
mode	network	entirely	to	make	ourselves	calm.

The	 study	 concluded	 that	 FA	 practices,	 such	 as	 one-pointed	 meditation,
create	 calm	 by	 keeping	 the	 one	 mode	 of	 the	 task-positive	 network	 on	 and
suppressing	the	internal,	default-mode	network.	NDA,	in	contrast,	was	shown	to
balance	external	and	internal	networks.	For	me	as	a	subject,	NDA	(or	effortless
mindfulness)	 is	 the	 experience	 of	 being	 undistracted	 without	 effort,	 aware	 of
what’s	 going	 on	 inside	 and	 outside	 as	 a	 continuous,	 interconnected,	 seamless
flow.

Awakening	Is	Restful	and	Creative
Another	important	study,	done	in	2018	by	Poppy	L.	A.	Schoenberg,	Andrea	Ruf,
John	Churchill,	Daniel	Brown,	and	Judson	Brewer,	looked	at	the	EEG	signals	of
practitioners	who	were	doing	similar	effortless	mindfulness	practices.8

The	 EEG	 distinguishes	 five	 main	 types	 of	 waves,	 each	 with	 its	 own
frequency.	 The	 slowest	 wave	 is	 delta,	 which	 oscillates	 between	 one	 and	 four
cycles	 per	 second	 and	 occurs	 primarily	 during	 deep	 sleep.	 The	 next	 slowest,
theta,	occurs	during	a	drowsy	state	before	sleep.	Alpha	waves	indicate	relaxation
and	 occur	 when	 there	 is	 little	 thinking.	 Beta	 waves	 are	 the	 next	 fastest	 and
accompany	thinking	or	concentration.	Gamma	waves	are	the	fastest	brain	wave
and	occur	during	moments	in	which	separate	brain	regions	are	firing	in	harmony,
such	as	moments	of	insight,	creativity,	or	“aha!”	experiences.

The	most	significant	outcome	was	that	the	frequency	was	in	the	high	gamma



range	 in	 all	 twenty-nine	 subjects	 doing	 forms	 of	 effortless	 mindfulness.	 The
study	is	also	striking	because	“in	contrast	to	using	number	of	hours	or	years	of
practice	 .	 .	 .	 the	 primary	 eligibility	 requirement	was	 that	 each	 subject	 had	 the
ability	to	shift	from	everyday	mind	to	awake	awareness.”9	This	is	important	in
showing	that	awakening	training	is	possible	in	the	midst	of	daily	life	rather	than
only	for	full-time	yogis	or	those	in	monasteries.

Whether	we	start	with	deliberate	or	effortless	mindfulness,	there	is	a	way	to
become	 effortlessly	 mindful	 in	 our	 daily	 lives	 such	 that	 we	 feel	 connected,
creative,	 and	 compassionate.	 In	 the	 next	 chapter,	 I’ll	 teach	 the	 effortless
mindfulness	versions	of	well-known	deliberate	mindfulness	practices.



M

3

Awakening	Glimpse	by	Glimpse

y	introduction	to	the	immediate	effects	of	effortless	mindfulness
in	 Nepal	 allowed	me	 to	 see	 that	 I	 did	 not	 need	 to	 remain	 in	 the	 East,	 join	 a
monastery,	 or	 practice	 in	 a	 cave	 to	 discover	 the	well-being,	 clarity,	 and	 open-
hearted	awareness	that	were	already	within	me.	I	returned	to	the	United	States	to
continue	to	train	with	eyes	open	in	the	midst	of	my	day-to-day	life.

I	have	no	doubt,	as	 I	 look	back	now,	 that	 it	was	 the	natural	compassion	of
open-hearted	awareness	revealed	by	effortless	mindfulness	that	propelled	me	to
pursue	 a	 second	 master’s	 degree	 in	 clinical	 social	 work.	 As	 I	 felt	 a	 deeper
connection	 to	everyone,	 I	wanted	 to	 train	 for	a	 life	of	 service	 to	 those	most	 in
need.	I	also	got	sober,	went	to	weekly	psychotherapy,	continued	psychotherapist
training,	and	got	married	to	the	love	of	my	life,	Paige.	At	 this	 time,	I	was	also
asked	to	join	the	Teachers	Council	of	the	New	York	Insight	Meditation	Center,
where	I	taught	deliberate	mindfulness	practices.	I	continued	to	attend	teachings
and	 retreats	 to	 develop	 and	 deepen	my	 practices	 and	 studies	with	 a	 variety	 of
nondual	and	effortless	mindfulness	teachers.

Right	 after	 graduate	 school,	 I	 went	 to	 work	 in	 New	 York	 City	 at	 the
Brooklyn	Mental	Health	Clinic.	This	was	 an	outpatient	 community	 center	 that
provided	psychotherapy	for	people	who	had	been	psychiatrically	hospitalized	or
were	 living	 in	 a	 halfway	 house	 and	 attending	 a	 psychiatric	 day-treatment
program.	 It	 was	 during	 breaks	 or	 when	 clients	 missed	 sessions	 that	 I	 began
exploring	and	developing	the	mindful	glimpses	in	this	book	that	are	versions	of
the	ancient	wisdom	practices	I	learned	during	my	travels.

As	 I	 gazed	 out	 the	 window	 into	 the	 open	 sky	 from	my	 seventeenth-floor
office,	 I	began	 to	explore	my	own	mind	 to	 see	how	suffering	was	created	and
relieved.	 I	 noticed	 how	 identification	with	 a	 thought,	 feeling,	 and	 parts	 of	my
personality	collapsed	my	thinking	 into	a	narrow	perception	of	both	myself	and



others.	I	practiced	shifting	my	awareness	from	a	contracted	small	self	to	a	new
way	of	seeing	and	being,	which	was	more	open-minded	and	open-hearted.	I	also
noticed	 how,	 when	 I	 intentionally	 separated	 awareness	 from	 thinking,	 I	 could
awaken	to	an	already	spacious	and	interconnected	view	that	was	free	of	a	deep
kind	of	suffering.

For	example,	 if	 I	was	 feeling	upset,	 I	would	acknowledge	my	 feelings	and
shift	 awareness	 out	 of	 the	 cloud	 of	 stormy	 emotions	 and	 then,	 from	 this	 open
mind	and	open	heart,	return	to	the	emotions	with	a	new	view.	This	brought	such
relief	 and	 joy!	 It	 was	 like	 emerging	 from	 a	 dark	 tunnel	 to	 a	 beautiful	 view,
except	I	was	not	only	seeing	the	view.	It	was	as	if	I	were	viewing	from	an	open,
quiet,	 loving	 intelligence	 that	 was	 connected	 to	 everything.	 How	 could	 this
freedom	 be	 so	 close	 and	 yet	 so	 hidden	 from	 most	 people’s	 day-to-day
experience?	How	was	it	that	despite	all	the	progress	humanity	has	made	in	other
areas—like	medicine,	communication,	and	technology—that	shifting	into	awake
awareness	was	not	something	that	was	recognized	and	taught	to	everyone?

I	approached	these	explorations	of	the	anatomy	of	awareness	with	curiosity
and	wonder.	 It	was	exciting	 to	experiment	and	 reverse-engineer	practices	 from
the	wisdom	traditions	I	had	studied	 in	India,	Sri	Lanka,	and	Nepal.	One	of	 the
approaches	 to	 awakening	 that	 I	 draw	 from,	 Sutra	 Mahamudra,	 originated	 in
North	India.	It	is	a	tradition	that	is	like	a	bridge	between	the	three	main	traditions
of	Buddhism:	Theravada,	Mahayana,	and	Vajrayana	(Tibetan).	One	reason	I	was
drawn	to	it	is	that	it	focuses	on	practices	for	everyday	people,	not	just	monastics,
to	awaken	in	the	midst	of	their	daily	life.	One	of	my	teachers,	Dzogchen	Ponlop
Rinpoche,	wrote	that	Sutra	Mahamudra	“is	seen	as	a	profound	method	because	it
does	not	require	any	of	the	sophisticated	and	complex	tantric	rituals,	deity	yoga
visualization	practices,	or	samayas	[vows].	Sutra	Mahamudra	has	a	tradition	of
skillful	 means	 that	 contains	 profound	 methods	 of	 directly	 pointing	 out	 the
selfless	 and	 luminous	 nature	 of	 mind.”1	 I	 began	 to	 try	 to	 translate	 ancient
practices	 I	 had	 learned	 from	 many	 teachers	 and	 texts	 into	 accessible,
contemporary	 language	 and	 forms.	 I	 checked	 in	 with	 teachers	 such	 as	 Traleg
Rinpoche	 to	 make	 sure	 the	 practices	 were	 staying	 true	 to	 the	 essence	 of	 the
teachings	as	I	translated	them.	I	also	began	to	notice	that	if	I	remained	receptive,
it	was	as	if	awake	awareness	started	showing	me	the	anatomy	and	principles	of
awakening.	 I	 started	 calling	 these	 contemporary	 versions	 of	 ancient	 wisdom
practices	“Brooklyn	Mahamudra.”



Stepping	Out	of	the	Cloud	of	Your	Mind
One	 way	 of	 describing	 the	 experience	 of	 glimpsing	 in	 effortless	 mindfulness
practice	is	to	use	the	metaphor	of	a	cloud.	You	may	have	felt	as	if	you	have	been
living	in	a	cloud;	maybe	it	feels	like	a	storm	cloud	a	lot	of	the	time.	See	if	you
can	feel	the	boundary	and	fogginess	of	this	cloud	that	you	call	“me.”	You	may
have	 been	 trying	 to	 feel	 better	 by	 cleaning	 up	 the	 cloud	 of	 your	 mind	 by
replacing	 negative	 thoughts	 with	 positive	 thoughts	 and	 developing	 good
attitudes.	You	may	have	tried	to	calm	your	body	and	mind	to	make	your	brain	as
clear	 as	 possible.	 Within	 your	 cloud	 are	 storms,	 old	 traumas,	 emotional
challenges,	and	relationships	of	all	types.	Each	time	you	change	these	things	and
clean	up	one	area	of	the	cloud,	it	seems	that	another	foggy	issue	or	thunderous
problem	arises.

Effortless	mindfulness	does	not	begin	with	dissolving	the	cloud,	calming	it,
or	 trying	 to	 transform	 its	 contents.	 The	 glimpsing	 method	 of	 effortless
mindfulness	 begins	with	 awake	 awareness	 stepping	 out	 of	 the	 cloud,	 shifting,
dropping,	 or	 opening	 to	 discover	 that	 you	 are	 also	 the	 open	 sky	 of	 awake
awareness!	When	you	shift	out	of	this	cloud	of	the	emotional	or	small	mind	and
discover	this	spaciousness	of	still,	quiet,	alert	awareness,	it’s	a	great	relief.	You
can	 realize	 that	 you	 are	 the	 sky,	 and	 the	 cloudy	 emotions	 and	 thoughts	 are
everchanging	weather.

Awake	 awareness	 is	 not	 just	 contentless	 space	 but	 is	 the	 actual	 source	 of
intelligence	 and	 identity.	Here,	we	 experience	 ourselves	 not	 just	 as	 a	 separate,
big-sky	witness	 but	 also	 as	 the	 awake	 awareness	 arising	 as	 thoughts,	 feelings,
sensations,	and	parts	of	us.	As	we	 reach	 the	 fullness	of	effortless	mindfulness,
we	 will	 discover	 open-hearted	 awareness	 and	 ways	 to	 naturally	 embrace	 and
welcome	all	emotions	and	parts	of	ourselves.	It	is	from	this	way	of	being	that	our
stormy	parts—our	dark	moods,	angry	rumblings,	or	fearful	shadows—can	truly
begin	 to	 heal	 as	 they	 are	 loved	 back	 to	 health	within	 this	 dimension	 of	 open-
hearted	awareness.	After	all,	all	weather	comes	and	goes,	and	no	storm	ever	hurt
the	sky.

Local	Awareness
What	 is	 unique	 about	 the	 effortless	 mindfulness	 approach	 is	 the	 use	 of	 local
awake	awareness	as	 the	primary	way	of	glimpsing	and	shifting	 levels	of	mind.
By	local,	I	mean	awake	awareness	that	is	appearing	in	one	specific	area,	such	as
your	head,	or	connected	 from	spacious	awake	awareness-energy	 to	any	object.



Local	 awake	 awareness,	 or	 simply	 local	 awareness,	 is	 able	 to	 know	 awake
awareness	because	it	is	never	separate	from	it.	Local	awake	awareness	provides
a	 tool	 to	 navigate	 through	 your	 own	 consciousness.	 When	 awake	 awareness
appears	as	the	boundless	ocean	of	awareness,	I	call	it	spacious	awareness.	When
awake	awareness	appears	within	a	particular	location,	I	call	 it	 local	awareness.
Local	 awareness	 and	 spacious	 awareness	 are	 two	 aspects	 of	 the	 same	 awake
awareness.

In	 effortless	 mindfulness,	 it	 is	 important	 to	 learn	 how	 to	 separate	 local
awareness	 from	 thinking.	 Local	 awareness	 is	 normally	 identified,	 attached,	 or
hidden	within	the	thinking	mind,	so	we	don’t	realize	 that	 they	can	be	separate.
Here	I	will	use	the	word	unhook	to	describe	the	ability	of	local	awareness	to	tune
out	of	or	disidentify	from	the	thinking	mind.

This	important	shift	of	local	awareness	can	be	reached	in	a	variety	of	ways,
such	as	with	the	inquiry	practice	in	the	Advaita	Vedanta	tradition	of	looking	to
the	awareness	within	by	asking,	“Who	am	I?”	or	the	Chinese	text	The	Secret	of
the	Golden	Flower’s	technique	of	“turning	the	light	of	awareness	around,”	or	the
Zen	tradition’s	“taking	the	backward	step.”	In	Tibetan	Buddhism,	recognition	of
awake	awareness	as	 the	 foundation	of	who	we	 are	 is	 expressed	 as	 “looking	 at
your	own	face,”	emphasizing	that	when	we	recognize	it,	awake	awareness	is	as
intimate	 and	 familiar	 as	 our	 own	 face.	 It	 also	 suggests,	 instead	 of	 looking
outward	from	your	face,	that	finding	awake	awareness	requires	turning	around	to
notice	where	we’re	looking	from.

Five	Foundations	of	Effortless	Mindfulness
Before	 I	 introduce	 some	effortless	mindfulness	versions	of	 common	deliberate
mindfulness	practices,	I’ll	share	a	more	detailed	map	of	effortless	mindfulness.
As	a	 frame	of	 reference,	 let’s	 first	 look	at	one	of	 the	main	 sets	of	practices	of
deliberate	mindfulness,	which	is	called	the	Four	Foundations	of	Mindfulness.	As
the	Buddhist	 scholar	Andrew	Olendzki	has	 said,	 “Most	practitioners	of	 insight
meditation	are	familiar	with	the	four	foundations	of	mindfulness,	and	know	that
the	Satipaṭṭhāna	Sutta	.	.	.	,	the	Discourse	on	the	Foundations	of	Mindfulness	is
the	 cornerstone	 of	 the	 vipassanā	 [insight	 meditation]	 tradition.”2	 The	 Four
Foundations	of	Mindfulness	are:

1. Mindfulness	of	body	and	sensations



2. Mindfulness	of	feelings	of	pleasure	or	displeasure	about	the
sensations

3. Mindfulness	of	mind:	whether	grasping	or	aversion	is	present	or	not

4. Mindfulness	of	mental	phenomena,	like	thoughts,	images,	and	other
mind	objects

The	focus	of	these	practices	is	on	observing	the	contents	of	consciousness—
the	experiences	of	feelings,	sensations,	and	mental	objects	that	we	can	notice	as
they	 arise	 and	 pass	 away.	 Through	 deliberate	mindfulness	we	 come	 to	 realize
that	these	contents	of	consciousness	are	fleeting—they	come	and	go—and	there
is	no	separate	self	to	be	found	within.

In	teaching	effortless	mindfulness,	I	have	found	it	helpful	to	create	a	similar
format	of	practices	I	call	the	Five	Foundations	of	Effortless	Mindfulness.	These
are	 contemporary	 variations	 on	 practices	 from	 a	 variety	 of	wisdom	 traditions,
particularly	 the	 Sutra	 Mahamudra	 approach	 from	 the	 Indo-Tibetan	 tradition.
Moving	 through	 these	 five	 foundations	 of	 effortless	 mindfulness	 allows	 us	 to
untie	 the	 knots	 of	 limited	 perception,	 knowing,	 and	 identity.	 We	 shift	 from
focusing	 on	 the	 contents	 to	 focus	 on	 the	context	 of	 consciousness—awareness
itself.	 Rather	 than	 focusing	 on	 the	 contents,	 we	 begin	 the	 five	 foundations	 of
effortless	mindfulness	by	opening	to	what	or	who	is	aware	of	these	contents.

We	first	shift	to	awake	awareness	as	the	foundation	of	a	new	level	of	mind.
This	allows	us	to	become	more	energetically	embodied	and	interconnected	with
everything	as	we	move	through	the	foundations.	We	continue	to	discover	a	new
way	of	seeing	and	being	from	open-hearted	awareness,	to	live	a	compassionate
and	creative	life.

Here	are	the	Five	Foundations	of	Effortless	Mindfulness:

1. Awareness	of	awake	awareness

2. Awake	awareness	as	aware	of	itself

3. Awareness	from	awake	awareness-energy

4. Awake	awareness-energy	embodied

5. Open-hearted	awareness



FOUNDATION	ONE AWARENESS	OF	AWAKE	AWARENESS

The	 first	 foundation	of	effortless	mindfulness	can	be	discovered	by	unhooking
local	awake	awareness	from	thought	and	the	thinker.	The	radical	premise	here	is
that	 we	 are	 already	 the	 awake	 awareness	 that	 we	 seek.	 Awake	 awareness	 is
currently	attached	to	or	identified	with	the	contents	of	consciousness.	Yet	awake
awareness	 is	 intelligent	and	 the	 source	of	being,	knowing,	 and	even	doing.	So
local	awake	awareness	can	detach	or	unhook	from	the	small	mind	and	small	self
and	 return	 home	 to	 nonlocal	 awake	 awareness–based	 knowing.	 Local	 awake
awareness	is	to	awake	awareness	as	the	air	in	a	bubble	is	to	the	open	air.	Local
awareness	 is	 interconnected	with	what	 it	 knows	 directly,	 so	 it	 replaces	mental
attention	as	a	way	to	focus.	Even	though	you	might	not	intellectually	understand
the	 instructions	 or	 believe	 that	 “you”	 can	 do	 this,	 simply	 and	 curiously	 allow
local	awareness	to	unhook	and	know	spacious	awake	awareness.

Another	 way	 to	 describe	 this	 first	 foundation	 of	 effortless	 mindfulness	 is
local	awake	awareness	is	aware	of	spacious	awake	awareness.

FOUNDATION	TWO AWAKE	AWARENESS	AS	AWARE	OF	ITSELF

The	second	foundation	of	effortless	mindfulness	 is	awake	awareness	becoming
aware	 of	 itself—by	 itself,	 as	 itself.	 This	movement	 requires	 going	 beyond	 all
references	 to	 thinking,	 senses,	 doing,	 and	 all	 forms	 of	 energy	 to	 discover	 the
contentless,	timeless,	empty,	boundless	source	of	knowing	and	being.	This	stage
is	the	realization	that	awake	awareness	is	always	already	awake	by	itself	without
any	 help	 or	 effort.	 It	 is	 the	 important	 shift	 to	 direct	 recognition	 of	 the	 new
operating	 system—awake	 awareness—rather	 than	 stopping	 in	 the	 gap	 of	 not-
knowing	or	no-self.

Awake	 awareness	 aware	 of	 itself	 requires	 a	 letting	 go,	 and	 the	 way	 of
perceiving	this	shift	is	subtle	because	it	is	a	nonconceptual	way	of	knowing—a
not-knowing	 that	 knows.	 This	 is	 the	 realization	 that	 awake	 awareness	 is	 the
source	of	intelligence	and	the	boundless	ground	of	our	essential	identity.	There	is
no	need	to	stay	in	this	pure	awake	awareness	for	lengthy	periods	of	meditation,
as	the	unhooking	from	small	mind	and	opening	to	a	vast	source	of	mind	usually
takes	 from	 three	 seconds	 to	 three	 minutes,	 as	 you	 will	 see	 with	 the	 mindful
glimpses	in	this	book.

Another	way	to	describe	this	second	foundation	of	effortless	mindfulness	is
spacious	 awake	 awareness	 is	 aware	 as	 spacious	 awake	 awareness,	 which	 is
already	aware.



FOUNDATION	THREE AWARENESS	FROM	AWAKE	AWARENESS-
ENERGY

The	 third	 foundation	of	effortless	mindfulness	 is	 the	stage	of	 turning	as	awake
awareness	 back	 to	 knowing	 things	 directly.	 We	 moved	 from	 foundation	 one
(being	 aware	 of	 awake	 awareness)	 to	 foundation	 two	 (being	 aware	 as	 awake
awareness)	and	arrive	at	 foundation	 three:	being	aware	 from	awake	awareness-
energy.

When	we	are	aware	from	awake	awareness	of	any	movement	inside	or	thing
outside,	we	realize	that	we	are	interconnected	with	that	which	we	are	aware	of.
We	 discover	 the	 direct	 experience	 of	 formless	 awake	 awareness	 appearing	 as
interconnected	energetic	aliveness.	In	Theravada	Buddhism,	this	insight	is	called
“interdependent	 arising”;	 in	 Tibetan	 Buddhism,	 it	 is	 called	 “one	 taste”	 or	 the
“union	of	emptiness	and	appearance.”	I	use	the	term	awareness-energy	 for	 this
feeling	 of	 the	 intelligent,	 interconnected,	 dynamic,	 all-pervasive	 field	 from
which	our	awareness	arises	into	form.	This	occurs	when	awake	awareness	begins
to	 be	 aware	 of	 anything	 and	 everything:	 awake	 awareness	 is	 not	 a	 detached
observer	but	is	interconnected	with	what	it	is	aware	of.

In	 the	 first	 shift	 of	 deliberate	 mindfulness,	 we	 realize	 we	 are	 not	 our
thoughts.	This	form	of	insight	meditation	is	done	by	disidentifying	with	thought
and	 creating	 a	 detached	mindful	witness	 that	 experiences	 thoughts	 as	 separate
objects.	In	this	stage	of	effortless	mindfulness,	the	subject	and	object	unify	when
awareness	becomes	aware	as	thoughts,	feelings,	sensations,	and	energy,	without
becoming	reattached	or	reidentified.	This	is	important	because	many	people	go
from	 awareness	 of	 awareness	 to	 a	 “big-sky,	 no-self	 witness”	 that	 experiences
thoughts,	 feelings,	 and	 sensations	 as	 if	 they	 are	 separate	 objects,	 like	 birds	 or
clouds,	 moving	 through	 the	 sky	 of	 awareness.	 This	 no-self	 witness	 is	 going
backward	 to	 a	 mindfulness	 state	 of	 what’s	 called	 “choiceless	 awareness.”	 In
contrast,	awareness-energy	is	 the	experience	of	knowing	everything	as	dancing
awake	 awareness,	 from	within	 and	 all	 around.	When	 awake	 awareness	 knows
movement	or	appearance,	it	knows	it	as	awareness-energy.	Awake	awareness	is
still	 the	 primary	 ground,	 but	 it	 is	 inseparable	 from	 the	 thoughts,	 feelings,	 and
sensations	that	are	made	of	awake	awareness.	There	is	a	feeling	of	subtle	unity
and	 interconnection	while	simultaneously	experiencing	 things	as	particular	and
separate	on	the	physical	level.

Another	 way	 to	 describe	 this	 third	 foundation	 of	 effortless	 mindfulness	 is



spacious	awake	awareness	aware	from	awareness-energy.

FOUNDATION	FOUR AWAKE	AWARENESS-ENERGY	EMBODIED

The	 fourth	 foundation	 of	 effortless	 mindfulness	 is	 awake	 awareness-energy
embodied	as	Ground	of	Being.	This	is	when	awake	awareness-energy	moves	and
includes	 the	dancing	emptiness	of	 the	union	of	 formless	 awake	awareness	 and
our	human	form.	At	first,	form	is	discovered	to	be	emptiness,	and	now	emptiness
is	 discovered	 to	 be	 form.	 The	 unique	 thing	 here	 is	 that	 embodiment	 does	 not
mean	just	your	particular	body	but	knowing	your	body	is	connected	to	all	bodies
and	 all	 things.	 The	 Vietnamese	 Buddhist	 teacher	 Thich	 Nhat	 Hanh	 calls	 this
realization	“interbeing.”3

To	put	 it	another	way,	awake	awareness-energy	 is	 the	ground	of	our	being,
but	our	being	is	not	 limited	to	our	human	body’s	boundary.	We	experience	our
no-self	 Self	 both	 as	 the	 ocean	 of	 awareness-energy	 and	 as	 the	 arising	 of	 the
unique	wave	 of	 our	 humanness.	 People	who	 practice	 effortless	mindfulness	 at
this	stage	report	feeling	boundless	with	emotional	boundaries	and	interconnected
with	a	sense	of	embodied	well-being.	We	feel	united	with	all	things	in	a	web	of
living	presence	that	I	call	the	realization	of	the	Ground	of	Being,	the	unity	of	the
infinite	and	the	finite.

Another	way	 to	describe	 this	 fourth	 foundation	of	effortless	mindfulness	 is
awareness-energy	 aware	 from	 within	 and	 all	 around	 as	 all-pervasive	 and
embodied.

FOUNDATION	FIVE OPEN-HEARTED	AWARENESS

The	 fifth	 foundation	 of	 effortless	 meditation	 is	 awareness	 from	 open-hearted
awareness,	or	heart-mind.	Effortless	mindfulness	 in	 its	 fullness	could	be	called
“effortless	 heart-mindfulness”	 because	 knowing	 has	 shifted	 from	 conceptual,
small	 mind	 to	 awake	 awareness–based	 knowing	 to	 being	 aware	 from	 open-
hearted	awareness.	From	here,	 local	awareness	replaces	attention	as	the	way	to
focus	 internally	 and	 externally	 in	 an	 interconnected	 way.	 From	 effortless
mindfulness	 at	 this	 stage,	 we	 sense	 that	 we	 can	 know	 information	 as	 needed
without	referring	to	thought.	We	can	remain	at	home	in	our	heart-mind	and	have
thoughts	come	to	us	from	the	office	in	our	head	via	Wi-Fi.

From	this	stage,	many	people	report	that	they	feel	the	coming	together	of	a
boundless	heart	and	a	tender	human	heart.	Many	say	that	they	feel	like	they	are



looking	out	of	“the	eyes	of	the	Heart.”	This	heart-mind	is	not	the	physical	heart,
heart	 chakra,	 or	 emotional	 heart	 but	 compassionate	 intelligence	 that	 is	 like	 a
continuous	 intuition.	 They	 describe	 an	 experience	 of	 unconditional	 love,	 non-
fear,	 non-worry,	 and	 non-shame.	 This	 feeling	 is	 important—both	 the	 vast
openness	and	the	quality	of	support—because	our	small	mind	or	subpersonalities
may	 try	 to	 scare	us	back	 to	 the	 small	 separate	 self	 or	 ego	manager	by	 saying,
“This	is	new.	This	is	strange.	There’s	not	a	lot	of	chatter	or	information.	I	think
there	could	be	a	danger!”	The	good	news	is	that	you’ll	be	able	to	feel	the	safety
of	 the	Ground	of	Being	as	 the	 foundation	of	open-hearted	awareness.	You	can
begin	 to	 welcome	 your	 fearful	 parts	 and	 to	 trust	 your	 intuitive,	 wise,	 loving
intelligence.

Another	way	to	describe	this	fifth	foundation	of	effortless	mindfulness	is	an
all-pervasive	awareness-energy	expressing	as	intelligent,	interconnected,	loving
open-hearted	awareness,	which	is	able	to	focus	using	local	awareness.

Inner	and	Outer	Doorways
When	working	 through	 the	Five	Foundations	of	Effortless	Mindfulness,	 I	have
found	that	it	is	important	to	acknowledge	different	learning	styles	and	doorways.
Some	people	find	it	easier	 to	access	awake	awareness	by	going	deeply	inward,
harkening	to	 the	adage	“the	kingdom	of	heaven	is	within,”	while	others	access
awake	 awareness	 by	 opening	 outward,	 connecting	 to	 awake	 awareness	 that	 is
greater	 than	 the	 small	 self.	 We	 can	 call	 these	 inner	 doorways	 and	 outer
doorways.	Whichever	doorway	we	start	with,	we	will	end	up	being	aware	both
from	spaciousness	and	from	within	ourselves,	simultaneously.

The	mindful	 glimpses	 in	 the	 effortless	mindfulness	 approach	 use	 both	 the
outer	and	inner	doorways	to	have	local	awareness	shift	through	each	of	the	Five
Foundations	of	Effortless	Mindfulness.

Transitioning	from	Deliberate	to	Effortless	Mindfulness
I’ve	developed	a	series	of	practices	to	help	transition	from	deliberate	to	effortless
mindfulness.	 These	 are	 initial	 techniques	 that	 introduce	 calm	 and	 focus	 as	we
work	with	effortless	mindfulness	 to	shift	 into	an	awake	awareness–based	view.
They	 are	 a	 good	 entry	 point	 because	 deliberate	mindfulness	 versions	 of	 these
practices	will	be	familiar	to	many	mindfulness	practitioners.	They	are:



• The	Four	Postures	of	Dynamic	Stillness

• Focusing	on	the	Breath	from	Within	the	Breath

• Beyond	the	Meditator

• Lovingkindness	and	Compassion	Are	Already	Here

• Embodiment	Scan

One	 of	 the	 advantages	 of	 starting	 meditation	 training	 with	 deliberate
mindfulness	 is	 that	 it	uses	commonly	understood	 terminology	and	 instructions:
“Bring	your	attention	 to	your	breath	at	your	nostrils	or	belly.”	When	we	begin
effortless	 mindfulness,	 we	 need	 to	 be	 patient	 at	 first	 to	 experientially	 learn
something	 new:	 “Unhook	 local	 awareness	 from	 thought	 and	 have	 it	 move	 to
know	your	jaw	from	within	your	jaw.	Now	have	local	awareness	open	to	know
the	space	around	your	body.”	Unhooking	awareness	has	to	be	fast	and	direct	so
that	 awareness	 can	 separate	 from	 thinking;	 otherwise,	 we	 may	 be	 simply
stretching	 attention.	 We	 do	 not	 need	 to	 intellectually	 understand	 how	 local
awareness	directly	knows,	any	more	than	we	need	to	know	how	we	can	balance
on	 a	 bicycle.	 Similarly,	we	won’t	 know	what	 it	 feels	 like	 until	we	 experience
balance;	we	have	to	jump	on	the	bike,	push	off,	and	get	moving	to	balance	and
ride.

As	we	do	these	mindful	glimpses,	it	is	important	to	note	that	local	awareness
does	 the	 shifting	 through	 all	 five	 of	 the	 foundations.	 This	means	 that	 shifting
does	 not	 employ	 imagination	 or	 effort	 by	 the	 ego	 manager	 or	 the	 meditator.
Instead,	it	 is	 the	intelligence	and	intentionality	of	local	awareness	that	unhooks
itself	 from	 thought.	When	we	 do	 this,	 we	 are	 not	 creating	 a	meditation	 state;
instead,	 it	 is	 like	untying	knots	of	consciousness	 that	bind	us	 to	 ignorance	and
suffering.

The	 key	 is	 to	 learn	 how	 to	move	 local	 awareness	 or	 experience	 how	 local
awareness	moves	itself.	Here	is	the	unique	thing	about	moving	local	awareness:
When	 I	 ask	 you	 to	 unhook	 local	 awareness	 from	 the	 cloud	 of	 thought	 and
emotion,	I	am	not	talking	to	“you”—the	ego	mind,	the	manager,	the	small	mind,
or	the	small	self.	I	am	talking	to	“You”—the	already	awake	being—and	asking
local	 awake	 awareness	 to	 separate	 out	 from	 thinking	 and	 know	 itself	 directly
either	within	or	outside	your	body,	and	eventually	both.	The	good	part	is	that	you



do	not	have	to	know	how	to	do	this.	If	you	say,	“I	don’t	know	how	to	do	that,”	or
“I	don’t	think	I	can	do	that,”	in	one	sense,	you	will	be	right.	That	“you”	can’t	do
it!	 Awareness	 will	 be	 letting	 go	 of	 that	 “self”	 and	 shifting	 to	 the	 vaster,
interconnected	sense	of	who	you	truly	are.

Not	all	doorways	or	mindful	glimpses	are	suited	for	everyone,	so	if	one	does
not	work	for	you,	please	let	 it	go	and	move	on	to	the	next	doorway	to	see	if	 it
opens	 for	 you.	 Each	 person	 has	 a	 different	 learning	 style,	 so	 I	 have	 designed
glimpses	 with	 inner	 and	 outer	 doorways	 that	 use	 visual,	 auditory,	 physical,
perceptual,	intuitive,	mental,	and	emotional	approaches.

The	best	way	to	proceed	is	with	the	curiosity	of	an	open	mind	and	open	heart
to	 see	 if	 awareness	 can	 disidentify	 with	 your	 thinking	mind	 and	move	 on	 its
own.	I	recommend	you	take	the	following	mindful	glimpses	slowly,	step	by	step,
so	 that	 you	 can	 experience	 each	 movement	 for	 yourself.	 Once	 you	 become
familiar	with	them,	you	can	do	them	anywhere	and	at	any	time	of	day.

GLIMPSE The	Four	Postures	of	Dynamic	Stillness

Deliberate	mindfulness	instructions	often	begin	with	physical	posture,
concentrating	on	how	to	place	your	body	in	order	to	sit	physically	still,	with	your
back	straight.	In	this	effortless	mindfulness	variation,	we	will	focus	on	stillness
at	the	subtler	levels	of	experience	to	feel	a	different	kind	of	dynamic	stillness
that	can	include	movement.

1. Find	a	way	to	sit	comfortably.	Take	a	few	deep	breaths	and	relax,	as
if	you	have	just	finished	a	day’s	work.	Become	aware	of	your	body
and	breath	as	if	they	are	in	your	awareness.	Become	aware	of	the
space	around	you,	the	feeling	of	contacting	what	you	are	sitting	on,
the	feeling	of	your	body,	and	the	motion	of	breath	happening	by
itself.

2. Notice	your	whole	body	breathing.	Notice	that	breath	is	happening
by	itself.	And	now	notice	that	awareness	is	also	happening	by	itself.
Notice	how	awareness	is	spacious	like	the	sky,	already	aware	from
outside	and	within	your	breathing	body.

3. Begin	to	feel	the	first	stillness	of	your	body	sitting.	What	is	it	like	to
be	sitting	on	the	earth	with	the	feeling	of	gravity	and	stillness?



Nothing	to	do	and	nowhere	to	go	.	.	.	just	now.	Rest	your	body	in
this	one	place	with	the	stillness	like	a	mountain.

4. Now	be	aware	of	the	second	stillness	of	space.	Feel	the	movement
of	your	breath.	Notice	the	stillness	of	space	in	the	pause	between
breaths.	Feel	the	space	in	the	room	and	between	objects.	Rest	into
the	space	within	the	moving	atoms	in	your	body.	Feel	the	space	and
stillness	in	which	everything	arises	and	passes	like	clouds	and	birds
in	the	sky-like	space	within	and	all	around.

5. Become	aware	of	the	third	stillness	of	water.	Feel	the	deep	knowing
that	your	body	is	mostly	water.	Feel	the	depth	of	water	inside	and	all
around.	Breathe	in	and	feel	that	the	ocean	of	water	is	deep	and	still
within,	even	while	there	are	waves	of	movement	and	flow.

6. Now	feel	the	fourth	stillness	of	awareness.	Feel	how	that	which	is
aware	does	not	come	and	go,	while	everything	else	changes.	Rest	as
this	timeless	awareness,	which	is	what	all	the	other	stillness	and
movement	are	made	of.	Rest	deeper	than	sleep	as	the	awareness	that
is	wide	awake.	Find	that	which	is	already	resting	without	any	effort
to	rest.	Rest	as	the	invisible	awake	awareness	that	is	here	now
arising	as	space,	stillness,	energies,	and	forms.	

GLIMPSE Focusing	on	the	Breath	from	Within	the	Breath

1. Become	aware	of	your	breath	in	either	your	chest	or	belly	as	it	rises
and	relaxes.	Focus	your	attention	there,	at	this	one	area.	When	your
mind	wanders,	simply	bring	it	back	to	the	simple,	one-pointed	focus
in	your	body	as	your	breath	rises	and	relaxes.

2. Now,	as	you	are	focusing	on	your	breath	at	that	area,	feel	the	area
where	you	are	focusing	from,	usually	somewhere	in	your	head,
behind	your	eyes.	Notice	both	the	place	where	the	breath	is	rising
and	the	place	from	which	focusing	is	happening.

3. Without	needing	to	know	how	you’re	doing	it,	feel	like	you	can



unhook	local	awareness	from	the	area	from	which	you	are	focusing.
Feel	local	awareness,	like	an	invisible	bubble	of	knowing,	begin	to
drop	downward	and	know	your	jaw	directly	from	within	your	jaw.
Feel	your	jaw	from	the	awareness	within	your	jaw,	the	subject	and
object	located	in	the	same	place.

4. Now	notice	that	local	awareness	can	move	on	its	own	to	become
aware	of	your	throat	directly	from	within	your	throat.	Notice	that
you	are	not	stretching	attention	down	from	your	head	to	your	throat.
And	notice	that	you	don’t	need	to	go	back	up	to	thought	to	know	that
you	are	aware	of	your	throat	from	within	your	throat.	Just	be	aware
of	your	throat	from	your	throat—the	space,	aliveness,	and	awareness
in	this	one	area.

5. Now	feel	local	awareness	move	on	its	own,	dropping	down	below
your	neck	to	become	aware	of	your	breath	directly	from	within	your
chest	or	belly,	so	you	feel	the	rising	and	relaxing	directly	from	where
it’s	happening.	Feel	what	it’s	like	when	the	focusing	and	the	focused
are	happening	in	the	same	place.	Notice	that	the	breath	is	happening
by	itself	and	that	awareness	is	happening	by	itself.

6. Let	local	awareness	stay	with	the	breath	as	awareness-energy	opens
to	the	spacious	awareness	outside	and	within	your	whole	body.

7. When	you’re	ready,	become	aware	of	the	space	in	the	room	around
you	from	the	space	in	the	room.	Then	continue	to	let	awareness	open
until	it	discovers	the	feeling	of	an	already	awake	awareness	that	is
both	spacious	and	pervasive	within	your	body,	like	a	seamless	field
of	already	awake	awareness-energy.

8. Be	aware	from	this	limitless	space	of	timeless,	boundless	awake
awareness.

9. Notice	that	as	you	remain	spacious	and	limitless,	you	can	be
intimately	aware	of	the	arising	awareness-energy	in	your	body,	in	the
room,	and	directly	from	your	breath	arising	at	the	center	of	your
body.



10. Notice	that	you’re	simultaneously	aware	from	the	limitless	space,	the
energetic	field,	and	your	human	body.	Notice	that	you	can	be
effortlessly	focused	on	your	breath	from	awake	awareness	without
being	distracted.	Feel	the	calm,	focus,	clarity,	and	well-being	from
effortless	mindfulness.	

GLIMPSE Beyond	the	Meditator

In	this	effortless	mindfulness	version	of	insight	meditation,	we	are	going	to	go
beyond	the	view	from	the	meditator.	We’ll	begin	by	focusing	on	our	breath	and
then	move	to	mindfully	witness	sensations	and	thoughts.	Then	we	will	notice	the
location	of	the	mindful	meditator.	We’ll	shift	from	having	the	mindful	witness	be
the	subject	to	realize	it	is	an	object	to	our	awareness-based	effortless
mindfulness.	Effortless	mindfulness	is	then	aware	of	our	breath	and	body
sensations	from	all	around	and	from	within.

1. Sit	comfortably	and	be	aware	of	your	body	supported	on	a	chair	or
cushion.

2. Begin	to	be	aware	of	your	felt	sense	of	breathing	at	one	specific	area
of	your	body.

3. Notice	the	feeling	of	your	body	in	this	area	as	your	breath	naturally
comes	and	goes.

4. Now,	notice	sensations	in	your	whole	body	as	sensations	come	and
go.

5. Now,	notice	thoughts,	like	mental	sensations,	coming	and	going.

6. Notice	your	breath	again	in	this	one	area	of	your	body.	Notice	the
feeling	and	specific	location	in	your	body	of	your	breath.

7. Now,	be	aware	of	the	area	you	are	focusing	from.	Feel	local
awareness	unhook	from	the	focusing	location	and	open	up	into	the
space	all	around.



8. Open	to	the	space	that	is	aware	of	the	location	you	were	focusing
from.	Open	awareness	back	and	out	until	you	are	aware	of	spacious
awareness.

9. Now,	be	aware	from	spacious	awake	awareness	of	the	space,	your
body	sensations,	and	the	location	of	your	breathing	all	at	once.

10. Feel	that	you	are	aware	from	the	spacious	and	pervasive	awareness
that	is	effortlessly	aware	of	thoughts,	feelings,	and	sensations	like	a
seamless	ocean	of	awareness	arising	as	the	waves	of	your	breath	and
body.	

GLIMPSE Lovingkindness	and	Compassion	Are	Already	Here

Take	a	few	minutes	now	to	experience	how	you	can	discover	that	lovingkindness
and	compassion	are	already	here.

1. Sit	comfortably,	eyes	open	or	closed,	and	be	aware	of	all	your
senses.	Notice	the	activity	of	thinking	in	your	head.

2. Begin	by	unhooking	local	awareness	from	thoughts	in	your	head.	Let
local	awareness	move	down	to	know	your	jaw	from	within	your	jaw.
Then	feel	local	awareness	move	down	below	your	neck.	Sense	the
awareness,	aliveness,	and	space	directly	from	within	your	body.

3. Become	familiar	with	this	direct	knowing	using	local	awareness,
which	is	neither	looking	down	from	your	head	nor	going	back	up	to
your	thoughts	to	know.

4. Feel	the	awareness	and	aliveness	together	as	awareness-energy:	rest
without	going	to	sleep	and	stay	aware	without	going	to	thought	to
know.

5. Feel	that	awareness	can	know	both	the	awareness	and	aliveness	from
within	your	body.

6. Notice	a	feeling	of	an	open-hearted	awareness	from	within	the	space



in	the	center	of	your	body.

7. Feel	as	if	you	have	relocated	knowing	from	thinking	in	your	head	to
this	embodied	heart-mind	within	you,	which	you	are	now	aware
from.

8. Notice	that	you	can	invite	and	welcome	any	thoughts	and	emotions
into	the	space	of	your	heart-mind,	so	you	can	remain	at	home	in
open-hearted	awareness	and	have	information	from	the	office	of
your	head	come	to	you	as	if	by	Wi-Fi.

9. Feel	the	sense	of	effortless	ease,	well-being,	and	“okay-ness”	when
you	are	here	now.

10. Notice	if	there	is	a	subtle	sense	of	joy,	tenderness,	lovingkindness,
bliss,	or	compassion	naturally	arising	from	here.	Sense	this	natural
lovingkindness	nourishing	every	cell	in	your	body	and	beginning	to
open	outward	to	everyone	and	everything	all	around.

11. Be	here	now,	having	dropped	your	center	from	head	to	heart,	so	you
can	look	out	from	the	eyes	of	your	heart-mind	and	see	how
everything	looks	and	feels.	Join	with	the	natural	lovingkindness	and
allow	it	to	radiate	outward.	Feel	how	your	deepest	intention	has
always	been	for	all	beings	to	be	well	and	happy.	May	all	beings	be
free	of	suffering	and	experience	naturally	interconnected	love.	

GLIMPSE Embodiment	Scan

Those	who	have	taken	a	yoga	class	or	a	mindfulness-based	stress	reduction
(MBSR)	course	will	likely	have	done	a	body	scan	meditation.	This	embodiment
scan	practice	is	similar,	but	you	are	not	scanning	your	body	from	your	everyday
mind	using	attention.	This	is	a	“nondual	body	scan.”	In	this	glimpse,	we’re	going
to	have	local	awareness	unhook	from	thinking	and	then	drop	to	know	and
experience	your	entire	body	directly	from	within	and	then	open	to	discover	the
safety	of	being	boundlessly	embodied.	This	is	a	good	practice	for	helping	you
wake	up	from	the	limitations	of	your	small	mind.	You	may	also	find	that	this	is	a
good	practice	to	help	you	fall	asleep	at	night.



1. Begin	by	finding	a	comfortable	way	of	sitting	or	lying	down.	Notice
the	feeling	of	your	breath	in	your	body.

2. Now,	shift	your	awareness	to	notice	the	location	of	where	you	are
focusing	from.

3. Next,	let	local	awareness	unhook	from	this	focusing	location	and
begin	to	move	down,	feeling	its	way	down	through	your	face	to	feel
and	know	your	jaw	directly	from	within.

4. Be	aware	of	not	looking	down	from	your	head	to	your	body.	Notice
what	it	is	like	when	local	awareness	begins	to	know	and	feel	your
body	directly	from	within.

5. Feel	local	awareness	move	down	to	sense	your	neck	from	within.
Then	feel	local	awareness	begin	to	expand	to	include	feeling	your
shoulders,	arms,	and	hands	and	then	further	expand	to	be	aware
directly	from	within	your	chest,	upper	back,	belly,	and	lower	back.

6. Allow	local	awareness	to	remain	aware	from	within	your	upper	body
and	continue	moving	downward	to	include	your	hips,	pelvis,	thighs,
legs,	and	feet,	knowing	them	directly	from	within.

7. Allow	local	awareness	to	be	aware	of	your	entire	body	from	head	to
toe	from	within.

8. As	your	awareness	moves	down	the	length	of	your	body,	notice	the
releasing	of	holding	and	a	deep	relaxation.	Be	aware	of	the	space,
awareness,	contact,	and	effervescent	aliveness	of	the	experience	of
knowing	your	body	directly	from	within.

9. Feel	your	body	from	the	awake	awareness	within	as	a	field	of
effervescent	energy.	Notice	the	awareness	and	energy	are	mingled	as
both	your	soft	body	and	a	boundless	quality	that	begins	to	open
outward.	Feel	how	energy	and	movement	are	happening	equally
outside	and	within	and	that	awake	awareness	is	aware
simultaneously	from	outside	and	within.



10. Feel	your	breath	happening	by	itself	like	waves	in	the	ocean.	Feel
that	awake	awareness	is	also	happening	by	itself.

11. Notice	that	awareness	extends	beyond	your	body	to	notice	the	space
in	the	room	and	the	awareness-energy	as	an	interconnected	dynamic
field	subtly	connected	to	everything	and	everybody	while	feeling
embodied	here	and	now.

12. Enjoy	the	feeling	of	the	natural,	boundless	freedom	and	awareness-
energy	embodied.

13. Rest	in	the	fullness	of	interconnected	embodiment.	

Once	 you’ve	 gotten	 a	 feel	 for	 effortless	 mindfulness—unhooking	 and
glimpsing—you	 can	 begin	 to	 apply	 the	 skills	 in	 your	 everyday	 life,	 such	 as
working	with	different	kinds	of	 suffering.	 In	 the	next	 chapter,	we	will	 explore
how	to	relate	to	physical	pain	using	effortless	mindfulness.



O

4

Effortless	Mindfulness	Pain	Relief

ne	winter,	I	was	having	a	wonderful	time	sledding	with	my	nephew.
On	one	downhill	run,	we	hit	a	big	bump,	and	my	nephew	flew	into	the	air	and
off	to	one	side.	I	reached	for	him	and	pulled	him	onto	the	sled	as	we	hit	the	next
bump.	That’s	when	 I	 felt	 a	 sharp	 pain	 in	 the	 lower	 right	 side	 of	my	back;	 I’d
twisted	 it.	 It	 felt	 as	 if	 I	were	 being	 stabbed	 by	 knives	 that	 shot	 a	 fiery	 agony
down	 my	 lower	 back	 to	 my	 knee.	 I	 hobbled	 around	 for	 months	 as	 if	 I	 were
dragging	a	wooden	 leg,	 trying	 to	not	aggravate	my	 injury.	Sometimes	 the	pain
was	pins-and-needles	dull,	and	sometimes	it	was	intense,	but	it	was	a	constant,
chronic	condition.

Over	 the	next	 few	months,	 I	visited	all	kinds	of	doctors,	chiropractors,	and
acupuncturists	seeking	relief.	The	diagnosis	was	sciatica,	which	is	a	compression
of	the	sciatic	nerve	in	the	upper	leg	and	lower	back.	I	went	to	my	primary	care
physician,	who	told	me	he	had	suffered	from	sciatica	since	he	had	hurt	his	back
in	 the	Korean	War!	He	 said,	 “There’s	nothing	you	can	do	about	 it	 except	 take
some	pressure	off	it.	I	can	give	you	some	medication	if	you’d	like,	but	the	pain
will	never	completely	go	away.	You	can	do	some	stretches,	but	you’ll	just	have
to	learn	to	live	with	it.”	I	chose	to	not	take	any	pain	medication,	and	I	tried	some
alternative	 treatments,	 including	 deliberate	 mindfulness,	 that	 gave	 occasional
relief,	but	the	pain	remained	chronic.

At	that	point	in	my	life,	thanks	to	effortless	mindfulness,	I	had	experienced
enough	 of	 a	 shift	 of	 awareness	 that	 I	 wasn’t	 experiencing	 much	 emotional
suffering	about	the	pain,	but	this	did	not	eliminate	the	continual	physical	pain.	I
trusted	that	all	was	well	and	relied	on	a	more	deliberate	mindfulness	approach	of
observing	 and	 not	 judging	 unpleasant	 sensations	 or	 feelings,	 so	 as	 not	 to	 add
more	 mental	 suffering	 to	 the	 physical	 pain.	 Deliberate	 mindfulness	 is	 helpful
with	 pain	 because	 it	 allows	 us	 to	 separate	 the	 objective	 sensory	 experience	 of



pain	from	the	more	subjective	judgments	we	attach	to	pain,	which	color	the	way
we	experience	it.

While	being	able	 to	step	back	and	observe	 the	pain	from	the	outside	was	a
great	 teaching	 of	 deliberate	 mindfulness,	 it	 was,	 unfortunately,	 not	 enough	 to
relieve	my	chronic	pain.	I	learned	to	accept	the	pain	as	it	continued	and	thought
that	that	was	good	enough,	seeing	that	pain	is	a	part	of	human	life,	with	no	way
around	it.	But	then	I	became	curious:	could	effortless	mindfulness	treat	physical
pain	the	same	way	that	it	treated	mental	and	emotional	pain?

That’s	when	 I	began	experimenting,	 and	 I	had	a	 remarkable	discovery:	 the
healing	power	of	awake	awareness	can	be	applied	to	pain	in	the	body	as	well	as
to	 the	 mind.	 I	 have	 found	 local	 awareness	 has	 an	 intelligence	 that	 can	 move
directly	within	the	signal	of	pain,	to	its	source,	to	see	what	is	true.	Then,	the	pain
signal	goes	to	the	background	intelligence	of	awake	awareness.

What	Is	Pain?
Pain	is	a	normal	part	of	human	life.	And	pain	hurts.	Although	pain	feels	like	a
threat,	 pain	 is	 not	 attacking	 us.	 Pain	 is	 designed	 to	 help	 us	 survive.	 Pain	 and
pleasure	 are	 signals.	 Pain	 is	 a	 signal	 that	 something	 is	 out	 of	 balance	 in	 your
emotional,	mental,	spiritual,	or	physical	life	and	that	something	needs	attention.
It	 is	 meant	 to	 be	 unpleasant,	 for	 a	 good	 reason:	 to	 bring	 our	 attention	 to	 a
potentially	dangerous	 situation	until	 the	 issue	 is	 treated.	The	 sharp,	 unpleasant
signal	is	designed	that	way	to	make	sure	we	drop	everything	else	and	attend	to
the	situation	immediately.	When	pain	continues	unabated	after	our	best	healthy
efforts	to	tend	to	it	in	a	physical	way,	we	look	for	ways	of	stopping	it,	reducing
it,	or	escaping	it	in	any	way	we	can.

For	 example,	 if	 you’re	 walking	 barefoot,	 thoroughly	 engaged	 in	 a
conversation	with	a	friend,	and	you	step	on	a	piece	of	wood	and	get	a	splinter,
the	 strong	 unpleasant	 pain	 signal	 is	meant	 to	 get	 you	 to	 immediately	 stop	 all
other	interests	and	attend	to	the	wound.	If	you	had	a	sharp	piece	of	wood	in	your
foot	 and	 it	 didn’t	 cause	 pain,	 you	might	 not	 bother	 to	 take	 it	 out,	 resulting	 in
infection	or	worse.	Once	you	take	care	of	the	immediate	problem,	or	source,	the
nature	 of	 pain	 is	 to	 eventually	 go	 away.	 Pain	 by	 itself	 is	 not	 an	 entity	 or	 an
enemy	 that	 has	 any	 motivation	 of	 hurting	 you.	 It	 is	 an	 important	 survival
mechanism	of	our	body—a	communication	tool.

By	way	of	our	senses,	we	have	contact	with	experience	in	and	outside	of	our
body	 that	 tends	 to	 feel	 either	 pleasant,	 unpleasant,	 or	 neutral.	We	 tend	 to	 like



pleasant	sensations,	which	leads	to	craving	what	we	like	and	trying	to	get	more
pleasure,	and	we	tend	to	dislike	unpleasant	sensations,	which	leads	to	rejecting
what	we	 don’t	 like.	When	 that	 strong	 craving	 or	 rejection	 happens,	 there	 is	 a
contraction	 of	 our	 greater	 sense	 of	 self	 into	 a	 specific	 identity	 of	 “craver”	 or
“rejecter”:	 we	 configure	 our	 consciousness	 into	 a	 “me”	 that	 is	 a	 “thinker”	 or
“manager”	that	has	a	strategy	to	get	its	goals	and	desires	met	and	believes	that
that	 strategy	 is	 real	 and	 right.	 Craving	 and	 rejection	 are	 a	 normal	 part	 of	 our
physical	 survival,	 like	 craving	 food	when	we’re	 hungry,	 but	 they	 also	 become
our	primary	source	of	suffering	when	they	become	our	identity.

Rather	than	reacting	to	the	pain,	we	must	treat	the	underlying	condition	that
is	 causing	pain	 in	 order	 for	 it	 to	 subside.	 It	 is	 important	 to	 first	 check	out	 the
cause	of	the	pain	in	every	way	possible	so	as	not	to	ignore,	overlook,	or	deny	a
potentially	dangerous	condition.	In	some	types	of	chronic	pain	that	we	know	the
cause	 of,	 like	 arthritis	 or	 sciatica,	 the	 nerve	 signal	 system	 is	 alerting	 us	 of	 an
issue,	 but	 there’s	 no	 splinter	 to	 be	 removed	 from	 our	 back	 or	 foot.	 If	 we’ve
attended	to	all	the	medical	and	alternative	diagnoses	and	treatments,	and	the	pain
still	 persists,	we	 still	 have	 the	opportunity	 to	 learn	 some	approaches	using	our
own	 consciousness	 to	 relate	 to	 pain	 differently.	 Effortless	 mindfulness	 is	 a
wonderful	 approach	 that	 does	 not	 in	 any	 way	 attempt	 to	 replace	 or	 deny
diagnosing	the	cause	of	pain	and	working	to	cure	it	through	any	and	all	means.	I
am	 simply	 sharing	 this	 practice	 as	 a	 suggestion	 of	 what	 can	 be	 done	 in
conjunction	with	any	medical	treatment.

With	 effortless	 mindfulness,	 we	 can	 learn	 to	 become	 present	 with	 the
unpleasant—an	important	skill	that	we	often	avoid	learning	until	we	experience
inescapable	 pain.	 We	 may	 already	 have	 experienced,	 through	 effortless
mindfulness,	how	chattering	thoughts	recede	into	background	awareness	or	can
be	met	by	open-hearted	awareness.	The	great	news	 is	 that	we	can	do	 this	with
pain	signals	as	well!	They	can	become	like	thoughts	and	go	into	the	background
of	 awake	 awareness.	 When	 the	 pain	 signals	 recede	 to	 the	 background	 or
significantly	lessen,	we	no	longer	have	to	suffer	silently	or	try	to	escape	the	pain
through	 behaviors	 of	 shutting	 down,	 numbing,	 addiction,	 or	 acting	 out.	 By
changing	how	we	relate	to	pain,	we	can	find	a	doorway	to	a	freedom	that	allows
us	to	respond	to	pain	from	courage	and	intimacy.	We	can	learn	to	be	present	with
the	unpleasant,	remain	sensitive	without	being	defensive,	and	be	responsive	but
not	reactive.

When	 the	 intelligence	 of	 awake	 awareness	 knows	 directly	 that	 there	 is	 no
immediate	 danger,	 the	 pain	 signal	 can	 go	 into	 the	 background.	 In	 my	 own



experience	with	back	pain,	the	pain	no	longer	needed	to	send	a	message	from	my
back	 to	 my	 brain	 to	 signify	 “Danger!”	 or	 “Check	 this	 out!”	When	 I	 allowed
awake	 awareness	 to	 experience	 itself	 as	 awareness-energy	 and	 embrace	 and
eventually	 recognize	 that	 my	 pain	 was	 not	 separate	 from	 my	 intelligent
awareness,	 it	 put	 an	 end	 to	 any	 resistance	 and	 secondary	 suffering.	When	 this
happened,	the	pain	energy	became	effervescent;	it	gave	me	a	strangely	warm	and
blissful	 feeling.	Because	 I	 could	work	with	 the	 pain	 through	my	 awareness	 in
this	way,	I	came	to	understand	that	the	sciatic	pain	signal	was	not	because	of	a
ripped	muscle	or	cut	tissue	or	knife	in	my	back	(even	though	it	felt	 like	that	at
times).	 It	was	 simply	a	 signal	 to	get	me	 to	notice	 the	 situation,	which	was	not
related	to	a	real	threat.

Within	 a	 week	 of	 starting	 to	 experiment	 using	 effortless	 mindfulness,	 the
pain	abated,	and	by	 the	end	of	 the	 second	week,	 it	was	at	worst	an	occasional
dull	ache,	 like	a	 sore	muscle.	 It	has	not	 returned	as	a	chronic	condition	 to	 this
day!	I	may	get	a	twinge	in	my	back	occasionally	if	I	twist	suddenly,	but	even	that
does	not	stay	long.	The	other	unique	change	is	that	pain	does	not	shoot	up	to	my
head;	I	feel	it	only	in	my	lower	back	area.	This	method	has	not	only	relieved	my
own	chronic	pain,	but	has	worked	for	many	of	my	clients	and	students	as	well.
Once	 local	 awareness	meets	 and	 acknowledges	 the	 pain	 directly,	 most	 people
report	reduction	in	their	experience	of	pain	from	around	an	8	(on	a	pain	scale	of
1	to	10)	to	a	dull	2.

Though	many	of	us	are	not	taught	this,	being	sensitive	and	vulnerable	is	one
of	the	most	beautiful	dimensions	of	human	life.	However,	if	we	are	sensitive,	we
are	 exposed	 to	 pleasure	 and	 pain	 on	 the	 physical,	 mental,	 spiritual,	 and
emotional	 levels.	 If	 our	 best	 option	 of	 treating	 pain	 is	 to	 defend	 ourselves	 by
becoming	 less	 sensitive,	we	will	 feel	 less	 pain	 but	 also	 less	 pleasure	 and	 less
fullness	 of	 life.	The	 interesting	 process	 of	 effortless	mindfulness	 is	 to	 become
more	 vulnerable	 and	 more	 sensitive	 by	 opening	 to	 a	 subtler,	 vaster,	 more
embodied	dimension	of	consciousness	 that	also	has	more	courage	and	support.
This	is	helpful	for	all	levels	of	suffering	and	pain,	while	at	the	same	time,	each
type	of	 pain	may	need	 to	 be	met	with	 a	 slightly	 different	 approach.	The	good
thing	is	 that	 the	natural	 intelligence	and	intuition	that	are	available	 to	us	as	we
shift	into	open-hearted	awareness	will	give	us	good	clues	as	to	how	to	meet	our
particular	type	of	pain	in	the	way	that	matches	our	unique	system.

I	have	received	many	emails	and	reports	at	retreats	from	students	who	have
experienced	 pain	 relief	 from	 this	 practice.	 Not	 only	 have	 they	 applied	 it	 to
sciatica	and	arthritis,	but	to	menstrual	cramps,	painful	recovery	after	surgery,	and



other	causes	of	short-term	and	chronic	pain.	Here	is	a	report	of	the	usefulness	of
effortless	 mindfulness	 from	 one	 student	 who	 had	 lived	 with	 chronic	 pain	 for
many	years	due	to	surgery	that	affected	the	nerves	in	his	neck:

Loch’s	simple	but	intensive	approach	to	awake-awareness	drew	me	in
instantly.	Here	was	a	practice	that	transported	me	to	a	place	both	deep
within	and	way	outside	my	body.	Once	I	learned	those	exercises,
those	“small	glimpses,	many	times,”	I	realized	on	the	spot	that	first
day	that	without	even	trying,	without	knowing	what	would	be	the
case,	my	pain	dissipated.	I	know	what	it	is	like	to	be	pain-free,	if
even	for	a	little	while,	each	day.	It	is	not	something	I	set	out	to	do,	or
something	I	thought	I	would	ever	experience.	But	it’s	a	beautiful	side
effect	of	the	awake-awareness	experience,	and	the	path	to	open-
hearted	awareness.

Local	Awareness	Is	the	Key	to	Pain	Relief
The	key	to	being	able	to	do	this	effortless	mindfulness	pain-relief	method	is	 to
distinguish	local	awareness	from	attention.	Let’s	review	the	difference	with	these
experiential	glimpses	so	that	we	get	a	feel	of	local	awareness.

GLIMPSE Experiencing	Attention

1. Look	at	one	of	your	hands.	Now	move	that	hand	out	of	your	vision
and	bring	your	attention	to	that	hand.	Try	to	continue	applying	your
attention	there	for	a	short	while.

2. What	was	your	experience	of	attention	like?	

Initially,	when	you	use	attention	to	focus,	you	may	feel	that	your	head	(where
your	brain	and	eyes	are	located)	is	your	central	place	of	perceiving.	When	you
bring	 your	 attention	 to	 your	 hand,	 does	 it	 feel	 like	 “you”	 are	 in	 your	 head,
looking	down	at	your	hand?	Or	does	it	seem	as	if	“you”	are	shining	a	flashlight
from	your	head	to	your	hand?	Or	do	you	feel	connected,	as	if	a	telephone	cable
is	running	from	your	head	to	your	hand	and	sending	signals	back	and	forth?	Do
you	 feel	 how	 attention	 can	 wander?	 Are	 you	 able	 to	 feel	 that	 maintaining



attention	is	a	continuous	process	of	remembering	and	forgetting?

GLIMPSE Experiencing	Local	Awareness

Now	that	we’ve	experienced	attention,	let’s	see	how	local	awareness	differs.	In
order	to	experience	local	awareness,	you	need	to	unhook	local	awareness	from
thought	and	know	your	hand	directly	from	within.	Try	this	for	yourself	now:

1. Unhook	local	awareness	from	thought	and	let	local	awareness	begin
to	move	down	through	your	neck	and	know	your	shoulder	from
within.

2. Slowly	move	local	awareness	like	a	knowing,	invisible	bubble	down
your	arm	into	your	elbow.	Feel	the	awareness	of	space	and	sensation
directly	from	within.

3. Continue	to	let	local	awareness	move	down	your	forearm	until	it
feels	your	hand	from	within.

4. Experience	this	new	type	of	knowing	that	is	happening	directly,
from	within	your	hand.

5. Notice	that	when	awareness	knows	your	hand	from	within,	it	does
not	refer	to	a	mental	image	of	your	hand.	It	feels	the	space	and
aliveness	of	the	sensations,	so	there	is	not	a	clear	boundary	of	inside
and	out.	

Notice	 the	 way	 in	 which	 local	 awareness	 knows	 your	 body	 directly	 from
within.	Once	 local	 awareness	 has	 unhooked,	 thought	 is	 no	 longer	 the	 primary
mode	of	knowing,	yet	thought	is	available	as	needed.	If	you	do	not	reference	a
memory	or	image	of	your	hand,	your	experience	of	your	hand	shifts	into	direct
knowing.	Direct	knowing	is	spacious,	alive,	and	much	more	fluid	in	feeling	than
attention.

You’ve	 just	experienced	how	local	awareness	moves	 from	 thinking	 in	your
head	to	being	able	to	directly	know	from	within	your	hand.	Now	you	can	begin
to	get	 a	 sense	of	 the	 feeling	of	 local	 awareness	unhooking	and	moving	 to	any
area	 where	 you	 are	 experiencing	 a	 pain	 signal.	 The	 important	 thing	 here	 is



feeling	how	local	awareness	moves	and	knows	directly	from	within.

GLIMPSE Effortless	Mindfulness	Pain-Relief	Method

Here	is	a	mindful	glimpse	to	work	with	physical	pain.	Many	people	have	found,
with	this	approach,	that	their	experience	of	pain	and	discomfort	can	change	so
that	suffering	is	dramatically	reduced.

Before	you	begin,	make	sure	that	a	medical	professional	has	evaluated	your
condition.	As	you	practice,	don’t	try	to	make	a	heroic	effort.	Instead,	the	key	is
simply	this:	instead	of	trying	to	move	away	from	the	pain	or	finding	that	you’ve
automatically	done	so,	learn	to	shift	your	local	awareness	to	discover	the	awake
awareness	that’s	already	with	and	within	the	pain.	A	good	metaphor	is	that	the
pain	is	continuously	calling	the	operator	in	your	brain.	You	can	make	it	so	that
the	operator	(in	this	case,	local	awareness)	can	actually	go	down	to	meet	the
caller	and	see	what	is	going	on.	Since	the	pain	has	been	directly	met,	it	no	longer
needs	to	try	to	get	the	operator’s	attention,	and	the	phone	can	stop	ringing.
Through	practicing	this	exercise,	see	what	you	can	discover	and	what	might
change	in	your	relationship	with	your	pain.

1. Begin	by	becoming	aware	of	your	body,	and	then	notice	the	area
where	you	feel	pain.	Notice	the	qualities	of	the	specific	area	and	its
borders—where	the	pain	begins	and	ends.

2. Notice	the	area	just	outside	the	borders	of	the	pain.	Now,	notice	the
space	between	this	area	of	pain	and	the	location	in	your	head	where
you’re	focusing	from.	Notice	the	feeling	of	the	pain	signal	sent	from
the	painful	area	to	your	head.

3. Bring	your	awareness	to	your	head,	and	instead	of	looking	at	the
pain	from	above,	as	a	mindful	observer,	unhook	local	awareness
from	your	thinking.

4. Feel	local	awareness	begin	to	travel	internally	down	to	feel	your	jaw
directly	from	within	your	jaw.

5. Feel	local	awareness	move	to	be	aware	of	your	throat,	knowing	your
throat	directly	from	within.	Now	feel	local	awareness,	like	a	bubble



of	intelligence,	as	it	continues	to	move	within	your	body	toward	the
area	of	your	pain.

6. As	you	do	this,	feel	that	you	are	knowing	directly	from	the	local
awake	awareness	that	is	sensing	from	within	your	body.	As	local
awareness	moves	into	the	area	of	pain,	allow	local	awareness	to	feel
gently	within	the	area	of	pain	without	referring	to	thought.

7. Local	awake	awareness	can	sense	the	aliveness,	space,	and
awareness	within	the	atoms	of	the	place	of	painful	signals.

8. Local	awareness	has	traveled	to	the	source	of	the	signal,	so	there	is
no	distance	between	the	origin	of	the	pain	signal	and	the	place	where
the	call	is	received.	Local	awareness	enters	the	pain	and	the	space;	it
gets	subtler	and	subtler.	Local	awareness	joins	with	the	area	that’s
sending	the	pain	signal,	and	it	assesses:	Is	there	really	a	threat	here
now?

9. Local	awareness	sees	that	pain	is	made	of	awareness	and	knows
directly	that	there	is	no	dangerous	threat	that	needs	to	be	constantly
monitored.	No	action,	response,	or	ongoing	pain	signal	is	needed	to
be	sent	to	the	brain,	as	the	situation	is	now	clearly	seen	by	the
intelligence	of	awake	awareness.

10. Local	awareness	reaches	the	pain,	meets	it,	and	becomes	intimate
with	it,	recognizing	that	it	is	not	other.	Let	the	pain	sensations	be
rerouted	to	the	spacious	awake	awareness	all	around	your	body.
Continually	responding	to	the	pain	signal	is	no	longer	necessary.
Local	awareness	has	already	responded	and	is	currently	within	the
area	of	pain.	The	pain	signal	can	now	go	into	the	background,	to	the
field	of	the	intelligence	of	awake	awareness,	rather	than	the	small
self	or	small	mind.	There	is	a	connection	to	the	source	of
intelligence,	a	larger	field	of	open-hearted	awareness	that	is
embodied	and	compassionately	comforting.	

In	 the	 first	 part	 of	 this	 book,	we’ve	 learned	 how	 effortless	mindfulness	 is
different	 and	 complementary	 to	 deliberate	 mindfulness.	 In	 part	 2,	 we	 will	 go



through	how	to	practice	effortless	mindfulness,	step	by	step,	in	a	variety	of	new
ways,	so	that	you	can	find	your	favorite	way	of	accessing	this	in	your	daily	life
to	 reduce	 suffering	and	 to	discover	your	optimal	mind	and	your	natural	 joy	of
being.



Part	II
Unfolding



I

5

Three	Hypotheses

offered	an	overview	of	effortless	mindfulness	and	awake	awareness	in	part
1.	Now	I’ll	present	a	set	of	hypotheses,	combined	with	mindful	glimpses,	so	you
can	 test	 them	 out	 for	 yourself.	 I	 believe	 the	 primary	 role	 of	 a	 teacher	 is	 to
introduce	students	 to	 their	 inner	 teacher,	 to	encourage	curiosity,	an	open	mind,
and	 an	 open	 heart.	 With	 the	 tools	 in	 part	 2,	 you	 can	 compare	 the	 way	 your
consciousness	 has	 been	 organized	 previously	 to	 a	 new	 way	 of	 experiencing
perception,	knowing,	and	identity.

Mindful	 glimpses	 are	 an	 effective	 method	 for	 this	 purpose	 because	 they
transcend	dogma	and	offer	a	scientific	approach	to	waking	up	and	growing	up.	I
have	 spent	 much	 of	 my	 life	 studying	 contemplative	 traditions	 from	 many
cultures.	 From	 the	 beginning,	 my	 interest	 has	 been	 to	 discover	 the	 common
human	 principles	 of	 accessing	 awake	 compassion,	 joy,	 and	 well-being.	 My
intention	 in	 this	 chapter	 is	 to	 present	 both	 the	 obstacles	 and	 the	 approach	 to
living	an	awakened	life	in	a	simple,	practical,	and	contemporary	way.

Three	Lenses	of	Consciousness
We	can	explore	a	map	of	consciousness	or	patterns	of	experience	through	three
lenses:

• Mind	(how	we	know)

• Self	(our	sense	of	identity)

• Awareness	(how	we	perceive)



Exploring	effortless	mindfulness	through	these	three	lenses	can	support	a	stable
awakened	life.	Here’s	a	bit	more	about	these	three	lenses:

• When	we	look	at	consciousness	through	the	lens	of	mind,	or	knowing,	we
are	focused	on	how	we	organize	and	process	information.	The	level	of
mind	we	know	from	changes	our	way	of	perceiving	and	our	sense	of
identity.	The	most	typical	way	we	know	how	to	structure	our
consciousness	is	from	thinking.

• Regarding	Self,	or	identity,	we’re	using	the	lens	of	what	or	who	is
perceiving.	Who	or	what	are	we	essentially?	We	can	play	with	shifting
from	a	sense	of	small	self,	through	an	experience	of	“no-self,”	and	into
the	interconnected	Self.	I	am	using	the	term	Self	to	acknowledge	both	the
ultimate	level	of	what	Buddhists	call	“emptiness”	or	“no-self”	and	the
relative	level	of	human	experience.	The	level	of	identity	we	are	operating
from	will	affect	our	awareness	and	mind—how	we	perceive	and	how	we
know.	These	in	turn	influence	our	experience	of	who	we	are.

• Awareness,	or	perception,	refers	to	how	we	see	things.	Awake	awareness
is	the	foundation	of	knowing	and	identity.	However,	there	are	different
types	of	awareness.	Depending	on	what	type	of	awareness	we	are
perceiving	from,	what	we	are	able	to	perceive	may	shift	or	differ.

Once	we	understand	these	three	lenses,	we	can	use	them	to	orient	ourselves
to	a	new,	upgraded	view.	We	can	notice	a	shift	in	the	way	we	are	perceiving,	the
way	we	are	knowing,	and	the	sense	of	identity	we	are	relating	from.	We	can	get
clues	about	which	lens	we’re	looking	through	based	on	new	ways	of	discerning
subtle	differences	in	our	awareness,	mind,	and	sense	of	Self.	In	this	way,	we	can
find	which	aspect	of	consciousness	we’re	experiencing	through	and	untangle	the
knots	of	confusion.	We	can	do	 this	by	 incorporating	mindful	glimpses	 into	our
lives	to	navigate	a	new	and	more	profound	way	of	seeing,	knowing,	and	being.

Even	 though	 I	 use	 terms	 like	 awareness,	 mind,	 and	 Self	 to	 describe
consciousness,	what	I	am	pointing	to	is	beyond	words	and	descriptions.	We	can
understand	our	consciousness	not	by	talking	about	it	or	thinking	about	it	or	even
labeling	it	but	by	wholly	seeing,	knowing,	and	being	it	ourselves.

The	 result	 of	 not	 upgrading	 our	 consciousness	 is	 suffering.	 The	 Buddhist
word	 for	 suffering	 in	 Sanskrit	 is	 dukkha,	 sometimes	 translated	 as	 “perpetual



dissatisfaction.”	When	dukkha	is	addressed	by	relaxing	out	of	a	small	mind	and
small	self,	we	discover	the	sense	of	effortless	mindfulness,	the	sense	of	Ground
of	Being,	the	sense	of	true	nature	and	natural	interconnectedness.

Although	 freedom	 and	 well-being	 are	 ever	 present	 in	 and	 as	 us,	 we	 still
experience	 suffering	 because	we	 are	 viewing	 from	 a	 limited	 perspective.	 This
suffering	is	neither	punishment	nor	caused	by	something	we	have	done	wrong,
but	 instead,	 it	 is	 a	 current	 human	habit	 to	 identify	with	 the	 limited	patterns	of
consciousness.	We	 are	 unable	 to	 access	 our	 natural	 capacity	 because	we	 don’t
even	know	it’s	possible	or	how	to	awaken.

It’s	 important	 to	 remember	 that	 the	 freedom	 and	 well-being	 we	 seek	 are
already	 within	 us.	 It	 does	 not	 need	 to	 be	 created	 or	 developed	 but	 simply
realized.	 The	 process	 is	 not	 so	 much	 about	 adding	 knowledge	 as	 becoming
familiar	 with	 the	 new	 operating	 system	 of	 awareness-based	 knowing	 through
effortless	mindfulness.

There	 is	 nothing	 I	 say	 that	 you	 need	 to	 believe.	 This	 is	 a	 theory	 that	 I
continually	test	based	on	my	own	experience,	my	students’	experience,	and	the
reports	of	 the	wise	folks	from	every	culture	and	historical	 time.	I	can	give	you
the	hypotheses,	then	a	set	of	experiments,	and	then	you	will	know	the	results	for
your	Self.

The	 patterns	 that	 contract	 us	 into	 this	 suffering	 can	 be	 divided	 into	 three
hypotheses:

The	Lens	of	Mind	Hypothesis:	We	suffer	because	we	are	in	too	small
a	mind—a	fearful,	chattering,	conceptual	mind.

Solution:	When	we	discover	the	source	of	mind	through	effortless
mindfulness,	we	know	directly	from	awake	awareness–based	heart-
mind.

The	Lens	of	Self	Hypothesis:	We	suffer	because	we	are	in	too	small	a
sense	of	self—a	feeling	of	a	separate,	solid	“me.”

Solution:	When	we	open	and	move	through	“no-self”	into	the
interconnected	Self,	we	are	able	to	be	with	our	internal	experiences
with	greater	capacity	and	know	our	Self	as	interconnected,	safe,	and
naturally	compassionate.



The	Lens	of	Awareness	Hypothesis:	We	suffer	because	we	are	in	too
limited	a	form	of	awareness—distracted,	narrow,	or	detached
perception.

Solution:	When	we	open	our	awareness,	we	are	able	to	perceive	from
awake	awareness	and	more	interconnected	dimensions	of	reality
directly.

We	 can’t	 use	 limited	 awareness,	 small	 mind,	 or	 small	 self	 to	 solve	 the
problems	that	they	are	creating.	We	can’t	train	our	small	mind	to	be	capable	of
awakening.	Our	limited	awareness	can’t	know	awake	awareness.	And	the	small
self	is	not	the	one	who	awakens!	We	will	dive	in	more	deeply	to	the	solution	for
each	hypothesis	in	the	sections	that	follow.

SOLUTION	FOR	THE	LENS	OF	MIND	HYPOTHESIS

We	suffer	because	we	are	in	too	small	a	mind—a	fearful,	chattering,	conceptual
mind.

The	 solution	 for	 this	 hypothesis	 is	 in	 discovering	 our	 awareness-based	 heart-
mind,	which	is	already	within	us.	We	learn	to	shift	out	of	 the	conceptual	small
mind	 that	 makes	 us	 feel	 alienated,	 alone,	 anxious,	 and	 fearful	 and	 into	 the
support	of	our	heart-mind	that	is	already	calm,	alert,	loving,	and	wise.	While	our
small	mind	 is	 changing	 and	 formed	 through	 genetics	 and	 conditioning,	 heart-
mind	is	unconditioned,	invisible,	intelligent,	and	dynamic.

Before	going	further	into	our	heart-mind,	it	is	important	to	understand	what
the	conceptual	small	mind	is.	Buddhist	mind	science	recognizes	the	familiar	five
senses—smell,	 taste,	 touch,	hearing,	and	sight—and	adds	 to	 that	a	 sixth	 sense:
thinking.	If	thinking	is	a	sense,	it	is	as	illogical	to	say,	“I	think,	therefore	I	am”	as
to	 say,	 “I	 hear,	 therefore	 I	 am”	 or	 “I	 taste,	 therefore	 I	 am.”	 Thinking	 is	 an
important	 sense	 for	 organizing	 information,	 but	 like	 the	 other	 five	 senses,	 we
cannot	know	who	we	are	solely	through	thinking.	A	baby	is	conscious	before	it
can	use	thought,	and	everyone	can	see	the	shining	light	of	“I	am”	radiated	by	an
infant’s	presence.	It	is	also	true	that	when	we	learn	to	know	from	heart-mind,	we
can	feel	the	“am-ness”	of	our	being	with	or	without	thought.

If	 thought	 is	 information	 like	 sound	 or	 taste,	 and	 thinking	 is	 a	 sense,	 then
who	or	what	are	thoughts	appearing	to?	When	thinking	appears	to	itself,	thought



to	 thought,	 it	 creates	 a	 “thinker,”	 which	 is	 a	 self-referencing	 loop.	 In	 Tibetan
Buddhism,	 this	 looping,	 or	 “selfing,”	 is	 called	 the	 “afflictive	 consciousness”
because	it	creates	a	limited	thought-based	sense	of	self.	If,	instead,	thoughts	go
to	a	more	spacious	mind,	they	are	seen	as	sense	impressions	and	information.	All
the	 senses,	 including	 thinking,	 can	be	 rerouted	 to	 appear	 to	 awake	awareness–
based	heart-mind.

Rather	 than	 organizing	 our	 identity	 as	 a	 thinker,	 with	 the	 effortless
mindfulness	 approach,	 we	 shift	 out	 of	 the	 thought-based	 knowing	 and	 into
awake	awareness–based	knowing	and	ultimately	 to	heart-mind,	which	is	where
we	can	live	from.	Heart-mind	is	when	awake	awareness	is	embodied,	and	we	can
use	memory	 and	 thought	 as	 needed;	 just	 as	 we	 can	 drop	 our	 hand	 to	 our	 lap
when	 needed,	 surprisingly,	 we	 can	 drop	 thought	 from	 the	 foreground	 to	 the
background,	which	leads	to	peace	of	mind.	Rather	than	the	usual	habits	of	going
up	to	look	to	thought	or	looking	out	from	a	thinker,	we	simply	relax	into	awake
awareness	and	then	know	from	our	heart-mind.

When,	 through	effortless	mindfulness,	we	learn	 to	separate	awareness	from
thinking,	we	no	 longer	experience	 thoughts	and	emotions	as	 the	center	of	who
we	are.	“I	am”	is	no	longer	thought	based,	and	“I	think,	therefore	I	am”	becomes
“Awareness	is	awake;	therefore,	I	am.”

GLIMPSE I	Am

Can	you	let	go	of	referring	to	thought	for	a	moment	and	feel	just	being	here	now
—the	feeling	of	“I	am”	or	being	that	is	independent	of	“I	am	this”	or	“I	am
that”?	

SOLUTION	FOR	THE	LENS	OF	SELF	HYPOTHESIS

We	suffer	because	we	are	in	too	small	a	sense	of	self—a	feeling	of	a	separate,
solid	“me.”

When	we	arrive	at	 “Awareness	 is	 awake;	 therefore,	 I	 am,”	we	can	 shift	out	of
small	self	and	live	from	our	vast,	interconnected	Self.	Other	names	for	this	Self
include	no-self,	true	nature,	unity	consciousness,	or	Ground	of	Being.

Both	 ancient	 wisdom	 and	 modern	 neuroscience	 agree	 that	 there	 is	 no
location	 of	 a	 separate	 self	 in	 our	 brain.	 The	 brain	 is	 a	 symphony,	 but	 no



conductor	can	be	found.	Living	as	if	there	were	a	small,	separate	self	inside	your
head	is	living	from	a	mistaken	identity,	which	is	the	root	of	suffering.

From	the	small	self,	we	are	living	in	too	tight	a	place,	not	knowing	that	there
is	more	 space	 available.	 Too	 small	 a	mind	 creates	 anxiety	 or	 depression,	 too-
narrow	awareness	keeps	us	seeing	with	blinders	on,	and	too	small	a	sense	of	self
creates	 a	 feeling	 of	 separation,	 loneliness,	 fear,	 and	 isolation.	 A	 full,	 intimate
emotional	 life	 is	 too	 much	 for	 this	 small	 self	 because	 it	 is	 a	 thought-based
creation.	 When	 operating	 from	 a	 small	 self,	 our	 energy	 goes	 down	 into
depression,	up	 into	anxiety,	or	 is	acted	out	 in	emotional	outbursts	or	addiction.
We	create	suffering	by	trying	to	solve	our	problems	with	only	the	resources	of	a
small,	 separate	 self.	 The	way	 out	 of	 suffering	 is	 not	 to	 create	 a	 smarter	 small
mind,	trying	to	figure	it	out,	or	even	meditate	to	calm	the	small	self.

It	 is	not	enough	to	just	realize	“no-self”	and	know	that	the	small	self	is	not
essentially	who	we	are.	The	solution	begins	with	realizing	 that	 there	 is	already
another	operating	system	available	and	then	learning	how	to	upgrade	into	it.	Our
interconnected	no-self	Self,	heart-mind,	and	open-hearted	awareness	are	a	new
view	with	more	room.

The	 key	 to	 allowing	 these	 transitions	 to	 fully	 occur	 is	 in	 resisting	 the
temptation	to	return	to	the	small	conceptual	mind	for	a	second	opinion	to	know
things	once	you	have	learned	how	to	shift	into	heart-mind.	From	heart-mind,	we
move	from	simply	“not	knowing”	to	a	“not	knowing	that	knows”	things	directly,
without	 reflective	 thought,	which	 is	 like	 a	 continuous	 intuition.	When	we	 rest
back	into	awake	awareness,	this	self-referencing	loop	dissolves,	and	then	we	can
feel	 an	 embodied	 awareness-energy	 interconnected	 with	 the	 world	 from	 our
naturally	awake	heart-mind.

The	Self	(with	a	capital	S)	is	not	a	bigger	version	of	the	small	self,	and	the
small	 self	 cannot	 grow	 into	 Self.	 The	 small	 self	 does	 not	 need	 to	 be	 fought,
defeated,	or	erased	but	needs	 to	retire	from	its	 role	as	 the	center	of	 identity.	 In
fact,	we	can	thank	the	small	self	and	give	it	retirement	benefits	for	working	so
hard.	As	we’ll	see	in	chapter	7,	what	we	call	small	self	is	a	group	of	parts	of	us,
subpersonalities.	We	can	then	look	at	this	constellation	of	small-self	system	as	a
way	of	bringing	greater	acceptance	to	our	personality.

When	I	ask	people,	“Where	is	your	sense	of	self	located?”	many	tell	me	it’s
in	their	body	or	upper	body,	but	most	say	that	their	normal	sense	of	“me”	feels
located	 in	 their	 head	 behind	 their	 eyes,	 looking	 out	 at	 the	 world	 and	 feeling
down	to	their	body.	They	feel	enclosed	in	their	head	and	separate	from	what	they
see.	 With	 effortless	 mindfulness,	 we	 address	 the	 location	 and	 formation	 of



consciousness	that	limits	awareness,	mind,	and	Self.	We	do	this	not	by	creating,
imagining,	 or	 cultivating	 positive	 states	 but	 by	 untying	 knots	 to	 reveal	 the
natural	 condition	 of	 our	 heart-mind	 and	 Self.	As	 a	 student	 of	mine	 once	 said,
“Everything	 feels	 empty	 and	 full.	 I	 am	 here	 and	 everywhere	 as	 if	 there	 is	 no
separate	self	but	also	things	are	alive,	and	I	feel	like,	‘I’m	just	me.’”

The	 Buddhist	 word	 for	 emptiness—sunyata	 in	 Sanskrit—is	 often
misunderstood,	but	understanding	this	pointer	 is	essential	 to	realizing	effortless
mindfulness.	 Interestingly,	 the	 root	 word	 for	 empty—svi	 in	 Sanskrit—is	 often
described	 through	 a	 metaphor	 as	 the	 invisible	 life	 essence	 within	 a	 seed	 that
allows	 it	 to	 grow	 into	 a	 tree.	 It’s	 not	 absence	 but	 is	 the	 dynamic	 quality	 of
awareness-energy.

Emptiness	does	not	mean	 that	you	are	 totally	absent	of	 a	 small	 self	on	 the
relative	 level.	 Emptiness	 means	 that	 everything	 is	 empty	 of	 a	 separate,
independent	 existence.	 For	 example,	 a	 flower	 is	 not	 a	 flower	 without	 its
connection	to	water,	to	air,	to	sun,	and	to	earth.	Realizing	emptiness	helps	relieve
the	suffering	caused	by	the	mental	habit	of	a	small,	separate	sense	of	self.	This
limited	mental	pattern	of	small	self	is	attempting	to	relieve	suffering	by	trying	to
be	both	independent	and	connected.	Instead,	the	pointer	of	emptiness	is	actually
saying	 that	 we	 are	 already	 interdependent	 or	 interconnected.	 From	 deliberate
mindfulness,	we	have	insight	into	the	absence	of	a	separate,	solid	self.	With	the
experience	 of	 effortless	 mindfulness,	 it	 was	 a	 great	 revelation	 to	 me	 when	 I
realized	 that	 the	 simplest	 and	 best	 definition	 of	 emptiness	 is
“interconnectedness.”

True	well-being,	the	relief	of	suffering,	is	not	just	based	on	belief	or	positive
thinking	but	comes	from	the	core	realization	of	interconnected	Self,	in	which	we
directly	 experience	 the	 reality	 that	 we	 and	 others	 are	 not	 separate.	 No	matter
what	difficulties	we	experience	and	what	beliefs	we	may	have,	our	true	no-self
Self	 is	 always	 here	 to	 help	 us	 come	 back	 into	 perspective,	 compassion,	 and
wholeness.

GLIMPSE Who	Is	Aware	Now?

If	there	is	no	need	to	create	a	solid,	separate	self,	what	or	who	is	aware	now?	

SOLUTION	FOR	THE	LENS	OF	AWARENESS	HYPOTHESIS



We	suffer	because	we	are	in	too	limited	a	form	of	awareness—distracted,
narrow,	or	detached	perception.

Opening	 our	 lens	 of	 awareness	 leads	 to	 seeing	more	 clearly	 and	 feeling	more
connected.	 One	 significant	 difference	 between	 deliberate	 and	 effortless
mindfulness	is	the	type	of	awareness	each	uses.	In	this	section,	we	can	explore
eight	distinct	types	of	awareness	related	to	deliberate	and	effortless	mindfulness
that	will	help	us	discover	open-hearted	awareness	 to	help	us	 live	an	awakened
life.

The	 first	 four	 types	 of	 awareness	 related	 to	 small	 mind,	 small	 self,	 and
deliberate	mindfulness	are:

1. Attention

2. Self-awareness

3. Subtle	energy	awareness

4. Mindful	awareness

These	 are	 followed	 by	 four	 types	 of	 awareness	 that	 are	 related	 to	 awareness-
based	mind,	Self,	and	effortless	mindfulness:

5. Awake	awareness

6. Local	awake	awareness

7. Awake	awareness-energy

8. Open-hearted	awareness

GLIMPSE Looking	from	Awareness

When	you	look	at	awareness	now,	does	it	have	a	limited	shape,	size,	location,	or
color?	When	you	look	from	awareness,	is	there	a	center	from	which	you	are
looking,	or	is	everything	interconnected?	



In	the	following	sections,	we’ll	look	more	closely	at	each	of	the	eight	types
of	awareness.

TYPE	ONE Attention

Attention	is	the	ability	to	concentrate,	focus,	and	be	cognizant	of	something	from
our	everyday	mind	so	that	we	can	function	in	our	daily	activities.	As	mentioned,
the	Merriam-Webster	definition	of	attention	 is	“the	act	or	state	of	applying	 the
mind	 to	 something.”1	Applying	 the	mind	 is	 the	 experience	 of	 being	 a	 subject
located	in	your	small	mind,	perceiving	an	object	(even	a	part	of	your	own	body)
located	elsewhere.	Attention	is	related	to	using	our	small	mind.

TYPE	TWO Self-Awareness

Self-awareness	is	a	psychological	term	referring	to	self-reflection	and	the	ability
to	 split	 off	 thought	 to	 create	 an	 observer	 of	 one’s	 thoughts,	 individuality,	 and
behaviors.	This	unique	form	of	a	human	being’s	awareness	develops	in	children
when	 they	 are	 between	 one	 and	 two-and-a-half	 years	 old,	when	 they	 begin	 to
recognize	themselves	as	separate	individuals	from	their	caretakers.	This	is	when
they	begin	to	use	the	pronouns	I,	me,	and	mine.	However,	it’s	not	the	naming	of
oneself	as	a	separate	person	that	causes	a	separate	sense	of	self.	Self-awareness,
which	is	one	of	humanity’s	greatest	strengths,	leads	to	the	creation	of	a	small	self
when	we	split	our	thinking	into	two	parts.	Self-awareness	becomes	the	center	of
the	 separate	 small	 self	 that	 feels	 like	 “me.”	 Self-awareness	 is	 aware	 from	 a
manager	 part	 (which	 we’ll	 explore	 in	 chapter	 7),	 sometimes	 called	 “ego
identity.”

TYPE	THREE Subtle	Energy	Awareness

There	 are	 two	 types	of	 subtle	 energy	awareness.	The	 first	 is	 internal,	which	 is
experienced	 as	 energy	 in	 and	 around	 the	 body	 as	 well	 as	 within	 (like	 your
emotional	body,	chakra	system,	chi,	prana,	central	channel	in	front	of	your	spine,
and	 inner	body	presence).	The	 second	 is	 external,	 in	our	environment,	 such	as
other	 people,	 groups,	 physical	 spaces,	 nature,	 emotions,	 objects,	 and	 subtle
realms	 often	 called	 psychic	 or	 spiritual.	 Subtle	 energy	 awareness	 is	 a	 normal
human	 ability	 to	 internally	 and	 externally	 feel	 or	 perceive	 people,	 spaces,	 and



things.
I	 include	 this	 second	 type	 of	 subtle	 energy	 awareness	 of	 people,	 places,

things,	 and	other	dimensions	because	 it	has	historically	been	omitted	from	our
Western	psychological	map	or	dismissed	as	if	it	were	imagination	or	projection.
Studies	 on	 highly	 sensitive	 people,	 mirror	 neurons,	 and	 what	 Dr.	 Dan	 Siegel,
professor	 of	 psychiatry	 at	 UCLA	 and	 executive	 director	 of	 the	 Mindsight
Institute,	 calls	 “attunement”2	 in	 interpersonal	 neurobiology	 are	 beginning	 to
validate	 this	 category	 of	 awareness	 within	 the	 paradigm	 of	 scientific
materialism.	 When	 I	 ask	 a	 group	 of	 students,	 “How	 many	 of	 you	 have	 ever
walked	into	a	room	and	felt	that	someone	is	upset	without	looking	at	their	body
language?”	usually	three	quarters	of	them	will	raise	their	hands.	(It’s	important
to	note	that	without	the	grounding	of	awake	awareness—type	five—many	highly
sensitive	people	can	get	overwhelmed	by	subtle	energy	because,	without	awake
awareness,	we	 are	 still	 experiencing	 sensations	 and	 events	 from	 the	 view	of	 a
small	self	within	a	separate	physical	body.)

TYPE	FOUR Mindful	Awareness

Mindful	awareness	is	a	witnessing	awareness	that	is	sourced	in	the	subtle	mind.
Subtle	mind	is	what	we	attempt	 to	access	 in	deliberate	mindfulness	 in	order	 to
observe	 the	 contents	 of	 the	mind.	 It	 is	 the	 ability	 to	 step	back	 like	 a	 detached
observer	of	thoughts,	sensations,	and	feelings.	Mindful	awareness	is	aware	of	the
everyday	 mind	 and	 the	 commenting,	 planning,	 judging	 functions	 of	 self-
awareness.	 It	 is	 nonjudgmental	 and	 neutral—not	 attached	 to	 thought.	Mindful
awareness	is	located	as	a	meditative	point	of	view,	which	some	people	call	“the
observing	ego.”	Whereas	self-awareness	is	a	layer	of	the	personality	that	has	an
agenda,	mindful	awareness	is	the	subtlest	layer	of	the	small	self.

Neither	 attention,	 self-awareness,	 subtle	 energy	 awareness,	 nor	 mindful
awareness	 can	 know	 awake	 awareness.	 The	 next	 four	 types	 of	 awareness	 are
where	 effortless	 mindfulness	 begins.	 It	 is	 important	 to	 distinguish	 awake
awareness	 from	 the	 first	 four	 types	 of	 awareness	 to	 continue	 to	 wake	 up	 and
grow	up.

TYPE	FIVE Awake	Awareness

Beginning	with	awake	awareness,	the	next	four	types	of	awareness	are	related	to
effortless	 mindfulness.	 Awake	 awareness	 is	 not	 the	 stuff	 between	 you	 and	 an



object;	it	is	the	foundation	of	who	you	are	and	how	you	know.	Awake	awareness
is	natural	awareness	that	is	present	already,	available	to	all	of	us	without	having
to	be	developed	or	created.	Awake	awareness	is	the	source	from	which	all	kinds
of	 thought,	 knowing,	 and	 intelligence	 arise.	Awake	 awareness,	 as	 the	 invisible
intelligence,	knows	that	it	is	what	everything	is	essentially	made	of.	One	reason
we	don’t	usually	 tap	 into	awake	awareness	 is	 that	we’re	generally	 looking	out
from	it.	Awake	awareness	is	the	source	of	knowing,	the	nature	of	mind.	It	is	prior
to	 thought,	 what	 thought	 is	 made	 of,	 and	 beyond	 thought	 as	 nonconceptual
wisdom,	 which	 can	 use	 thought	 when	 needed.	 We	 can	 only	 know	 awake
awareness	when	it	has	recognized	itself.

Effortless	mindfulness	begins	by	 looking	back	 through	 the	mindful	witness
to	 this	 spacious,	 already-awake	 awareness.	 This	 is	 how	 effortless	mindfulness
moves	 past	 the	 deliberate	 mindfulness	 levels	 of	 awareness.	 Deliberate
mindfulness	 stops	 at	 the	 point	 of	 a	 mindful	 witness,	 or	 perhaps	 even	 at	 the
absence	of	a	 separate	 self	or	at	a	gap	of	not-knowing,	or	at	deconstructing	 the
small	mind	into	its	component	parts	and	staying	within	the	realm	of	psychology
rather	 than	 finding	 the	 Self	 that	 can	 assimilate	 all	 of	 the	 parts.	 Effortless
mindfulness	moves	beyond	into	awake	awareness,	the	spacious	emptiness	that	is
everything.	 The	 shift	 from	 deliberate	 to	 effortless	mindfulness	 can	 feel	 like	 a
step	back	 from	everything,	but	 effortless	mindfulness	 isn’t	 about	progressively
pulling	 back	 farther	 and	 farther,	 zooming	 out	 like	 a	 movie	 camera.	 With
effortless	mindfulness,	we	turn	awake	awareness	around	to	discover	who	or	what
is	behind	the	camera.	When	the	meditator	is	 looked	for	with	awake	awareness,
none	 can	 be	 found	 because	 when	 awareness	 looks	 back,	 the	 location	 of	 the
mindful	 witness	 merges	 or	 dissolves.	 The	 magic	 we	 discover	 is	 that	 there	 is
seeing	but	without	a	seer	or	source	of	seeing.

TYPE	SIX Local	Awake	Awareness

Local	 awareness	 is	 the	 dimension	 of	 awake	 awareness	 that	 can	 move	 from
identification	with	our	body,	small	mind,	and	small	self	to	awake	awareness.	It	is
also	how	we	focus	from	awake	awareness-energy	on	any	task	or	object.	Once	we
are	introduced	to	local	awareness,	we	don’t	have	to	come	back	to	use	attention	to
focus	from	awake	awareness-energy.	Local	awareness	is	like	another	sense	that
is	 designed	 to	 know	 awake	 awareness.	 It	 allows	 us	 to	 be	 both	 spacious	 and
present,	so	we	don’t	have	to	be	either	limitless	or	limited.



TYPE	SEVEN Awake	Awareness-Energy

As	 soon	 as	 awake	 awareness	 moves	 from	 knowing	 itself	 as	 awareness	 to
experiencing	any	energy,	form,	or	appearance,	it	becomes	what	I	call	awareness-
energy.	 In	 this	 experience	 of	 effortless	mindfulness,	 awareness	 is	 not	 separate
from	 energy	 or	 appearances.	 Thoughts,	 feelings,	 and	 sensations	 are	 made	 of
awake	awareness	and	known	simultaneously	from	the	outside	and	from	within.	It
is	as	if	the	ocean	of	awareness,	with	all	experiences,	including	our	own	body,	is
waves	 of	 awareness-energy.	 My	 friend	 and	 colleague,	 the	 spiritual	 teacher
Adyashanti,	put	it	this	way:

When	we	perceive	ourselves	as	consciousness,	as	awareness	itself,	it
is	life	changing.	This	is	a	significant	insight,	and	we	can	even	call	it
its	own	kind	of	awakening—a	fundamental	shift	out	of	identification
with	thoughts	and	feelings	to	the	purely	subjective	experience	of
being	consciousness	or	awareness—but	it	is	not	an	end	point.	It	is	a
midpoint	of	realization.	We	still	have	a	fundamental	difference
between	the	perceiver	and	the	perceived,	between	awareness	or
consciousness	and	everything	that	awareness	or	consciousness	is
aware	of	or	conscious	of.	Next	come	the	deeper	states	of	realization,
when	the	perceiver	or	the	witness	state	collapses	and	when	the
perception	of	subject	and	object	collapses.	That	is	when	we	find	our
truth	about	the	nature	of	our	existence.3

The	 movement	 of	 viewing	 from	 a	 mindful	 witness	 to	 awake	 awareness-
energy	 is	 the	 “collapse”	 or	 unity	 of	 subject	 and	 object.	 The	 view	 from
awareness-energy	feels	interconnected	with	what	we	are	aware	of,	without	being
identified	with	anything.	Awake	awareness-energy	experiences	directly	from	all
around	 and	 within	 on	 a	 felt-sense	 level,	 without	 viewing	 from	 a	 witnessing
awareness,	without	merging	back	 into	 subtle	 energy,	 and	without	 reidentifying
with	the	small	self.

At	first,	awake	awareness-energy	is	experienced	as	an	all-pervasive	field	of
dynamic	 intelligence	and	energy.	Then	 the	 feeling	of	oneness	becomes	a	unity
that	has	unique	expressions	and	appearances	in	the	field	of	perception.	There	is	a
simultaneous	 feeling	 of	 local	 embodiment	 and	 vast	 openness	 and
interconnectedness	to	all	existence.	The	root	word	of	the	word	existence	in	Latin
—existere—means	 “to	 come	 forth,	 stand	 out,	 or	 emerge.”	 Here,	 the	 wave	 of
awareness	emerges	from	the	ocean	of	awareness	while	still	being	of	it.



In	 the	North	 India	Mahamudra	 tradition,	 this	 stage	 of	 realization	 is	 called
“one	 taste”	 because	 stillness,	movement,	 thought,	 sensation,	 and	 forms	 are	 all
recognized	 to	be	made	of	awake	awareness-energy.	When	we	are	experiencing
from	awake	awareness-energy,	we	are	aware	of	everything	we	see	with	our	eyes
on	not	just	the	physical	level	but	also	a	felt-sense	level.

We	can	experience	boundlessness	and	boundaries,	spacious	and	permeating
awareness-energy,	 and	 a	 feeling	 of	 being	 everywhere	 and	 nowhere	 and	 very
much	 here.	Awareness-energy	 is	 not	 in	 your	 body;	 your	 body	 is	made	 of	 this
alive	 awareness.	We	 simultaneously	 experience	 a	 felt-sense	 of	 our	 body	 from
within	 and	 all	 around,	 and	we	 feel	 interconnected	with	 everybody.	One	of	my
students	 reported,	 “I	 feel	 like	 a	 cat	 walking:	 fluid,	 connected,	 both	 soft	 and
strong,	without	being	tight	or	in	my	head.”

TYPE	EIGHT Open-Hearted	Awareness

Open-hearted	 awareness	 is	 aware	 from	 heart-mind.	 With	 open-hearted
awareness,	 we	 can	welcome	 all	 thoughts	 and	 emotions,	 and	we	 recognize	 the
same	open-hearted	awareness	 in	others.	From	open-hearted	awareness,	we	 feel
connected	and	protected,	vulnerable	and	courageous,	and	motivated	to	create	and
relate.	Open-hearted	awareness	 looks	 from	a	wisdom-based	 loving	 intelligence
that	feels	boundless,	interconnected,	and	fully	human.

We	begin	to	notice	infinite	boundless	love	as	the	ground	and	then	notice	our
true	Self	as	 the	open-hearted	awareness	 loving	presence.	This	allows	us	 to	feel
what	we	need	to	do	to	let	that	safety	be	felt,	to	be	vulnerable	to	the	deep	abiding
safety	 that	 is	 always	 right	 here.	You	need	do	nothing	but	 receive	 the	 love	 and
safety.	From	open-hearted	awareness,	you	are	the	Self	that	is	receiving,	made	of,
and	giving	the	unconditional	love	that	arises	naturally.

GLIMPSE Knowing	from	Open-Hearted	Awareness

Instead	of	going	to	thought	to	know,	look	to	wordless	awareness.	Pause	.	.	.	and
notice	this	awareness	is	outside	and	within.	Feel	the	openness	as	this	field	of
awareness-energy	connects	with	your	body	and	knows	from	a	new	location	of
open-hearted	awareness.	



I

6

Practicing	the	Five	Foundations	of	Effortless
Mindfulness

n	this	chapter	(a	practice	book	within	a	book!),	 I	share	mindful	glimpses
for	 each	 of	 the	 Five	 Foundations	 of	 Effortless	 Mindfulness	 we	 explored	 in
chapter	3:

1. Awareness	of	awake	awareness

2. Awake	awareness	as	aware	of	itself

3. Awareness	from	awake	awareness-energy

4. Awake	awareness-energy	embodied

5. Open-hearted	awareness

Here,	we’ll	make	 the	shift	 from	simply	 learning	about	 the	Five	Foundations	 to
experiencing	 them	directly.	 I’ll	 explain	 them	 in	 further	 detail	 and	 then	present
mindful	glimpses	related	to	each	foundation.	You	can	also	record	them	in	your
own	voice	and	at	your	own	pace	to	experience	the	mindful	glimpses	directly.

As	you	begin	these	mindful	glimpses,	 it’s	 important	 to	remember	how	they
differ	 from	guided	meditations.	 In	mindful	glimpses,	unhooking	awareness	has
to	be	fast	and	direct	so	that	awareness	can	detach	from	thinking;	otherwise,	you
might	simply	be	using	attention.	In	mindful	glimpses,	we	don’t	rely	on	attention,
concentration,	willpower,	imagination,	or	thought.	We	move	local	awareness	into
awake	awareness	as	if	it	were	air	into	air.	Instead	of	a	pebble	being	tossed	into	a



pond,	it	feels	like	a	drop	of	water	merging	with	a	body	of	water:	that’s	how	we
move	from	a	small	point	of	view	to	perceive	from	awake	awareness.

PRACTICES	FOR	THE	FIRST	FOUNDATION	OF	EFFORTLESS
MINDFULNESS

Awareness	of	Awake	Awareness
The	mindful	 attention	 that	 is	 employed	 in	 deliberate	 mindfulness	 to	 focus	 on
breath	and	observe	 thoughts	cannot	be	used	 to	find	awake	awareness.	Here	we
discover	 that	 we	 can	 use	 local	 awake	 awareness	 to	 become	 aware	 of	 awake
awareness.	Awake	 awareness	 feels	 crisply	 clear	 like	 a	 cloudless	 spring	 day.	 It
feels	open,	infinite,	silent,	alert,	and	intelligent.	Local	awareness	is	hidden	within
us	and	can	separate	out	from	our	thinking	mind	and	expand	into	spacious	awake
awareness.	To	do	this,	we	unhook,	detach,	disidentify,	surrender,	open,	or	relax
local	 awareness	 from	 being	 identified	 with	 thought	 and	 other	 parts	 of	 us	 that
have	been	running	the	show.

Awareness	 of	 awake	 awareness	 is	 the	 first	 transition	 that	 takes	 us	 beyond
small	mind	and	small	self.	To	feel	awareness	being	aware	of	itself,	to	discover	its
depth	 and	 fullness,	 awareness	 needs	 to	 go	 completely	 beyond	 referencing	 the
body	and	mind.	You	will	learn	to	feel	the	shift	so	that	even	if	there	are	thoughts
and	sensations,	awareness	aware	of	itself	is	primary.

Understanding	 that	 spacious	 awareness	 is	 already	 awake	 without	 our	 help
means	 that	we	 do	 not	 have	 to	 create	 it	 or	 develop	 it.	All	we	 need	 to	 do	 is	 to
discover	how	we	can	know	it	and	then	simply	surrender,	mingle,	or	plug	into	that
source.	The	trick	to	recognizing	spacious	awareness	is	to	be	clear	that	we	have
unhooked	 from	 the	mind	 and	 then	 the	 body,	without	 spacing	 out	 and	without
referencing	 some	 state	 of	 energy	 or	 imagination	 either.	 Through	 glimpses,	we
can	 learn	 to	 distinguish	 being	 aware	 of	 the	 space	 in	 the	 room	 from	 spacious
awareness.

We	begin	 awareness	of	 awareness	by	having	 local	 awareness	unhook	 from
thinking	 and	 identification	 with	 other	 parts	 of	 us.	 Then	 local	 awareness	 can
move	to	other	senses	and	then	to	space	as	transitions	to	awareness	of	awareness.
Try	these	five	mindful	glimpses	to	see	which	work	best	for	you.

GLIMPSE Awareness	Following	the	Breath	Home



Try	hitching	a	ride	on	your	breath	to	help	local	awareness	unhook.

1. Begin	by	unhooking	local	awareness	from	thinking	and	have	it
move	a	short	distance	from	behind	your	eyes	to	where	your	breath
contacts	your	nostrils.	As	inhalation	occurs,	let	local	awareness
focus	completely	on	this	small	area	of	sensation.	As	exhalation
occurs,	sense	the	breath	touching	the	nostrils	as	it	goes	out.	Do	this
for	several	breaths	in	a	row.

2. With	the	next	in-breath,	allow	local	awareness	to	ride	the	air	as	it
moves	from	your	nostrils	down	your	throat	and	into	your	chest	or
belly.

3. Allow	local	awareness	to	unhook	from	the	breath	and	remain	with
the	awake	awareness	and	aliveness	below	your	neck,	even	as	your
breath	goes	back	up	and	out	again.	Notice	local	awareness	opening
to	the	aliveness	and	spacious	awareness	within	your	body	while	not
returning	to	your	head	and	thoughts.

4. Let	the	feeling	of	your	chest	or	belly	rising	and	falling	with	each
new	breath	be	the	place	of	contact	for	your	awareness	to	stay
interested.	Notice	your	breath,	feeling	it	from	within	and	opening
out,	letting	go	and	being	here	and	now.	Notice	the	breath	happening
by	itself	as	if	you	are	being	breathed.	Allow	the	field	of	awake
awareness	to	effortlessly	focus	intimately	on	your	breath.	Feel	the
stillness,	silence,	and	peace	beyond	words.

5. Notice	that	the	breath	is	happening	by	itself,	just	as	awake
awareness	is	also	happening	and	knowing	by	itself	from	within	and
all	around.	

OPEN-EYED	MEDITATION

To	 do	 small	 glimpses	 during	 the	 day	 and	 transition	 from	 small	 glimpses	 to
everyday	activity,	we	will	need	to	learn	how	to	do	these	with	our	eyes	open.	It
can	 be	 helpful	 to	 begin	 with	 some	 retraining	 of	 the	 relationship	 between	 our
eyes,	our	small	mind,	and	our	small	self.	We	can	begin	to	return	our	eyes	to	their



natural	condition	and	have	the	information	move	to	awake	awareness.
According	to	the	American	Foundation	for	the	Blind,	“vision	is	the	product

of	 a	 complex	 system	 of	 which	 the	 eyes	 are	 only	 one	 part.	 The	 processing	 of
visual	 information—the	 receipt	 of	 visual	 stimuli	 through	 the	 eyes,	 its
interpretation	by	various	brain	centers,	 and	 its	 translation	 into	visual	 images—
has	been	estimated	to	involve	as	much	as	40	percent	of	the	brain.”1

When	our	eyes	are	darting	around	or	scanning	for	a	specific	threat,	we	are	on
alert.	 Sometimes	 our	 attempts	 to	 focus	 ourselves	 by	 narrowing	 our	 eyes	 and
concentrating	can	keep	our	brain	in	a	fixed,	task-positive	mode.	Our	goal	in	this
book	is	to	be	able	to	shift	to	another	operating	system,	the	end	point	of	which	is
open-hearted	awareness,	in	which	all	our	senses	and	systems—including	vision
—are	 functioning	 in	 their	natural	 state:	open,	 relaxed,	clear,	and	 integrated.	To
do	this,	we	need	to	learn	how	to	shift	our	awareness	and	live	with	our	eyes	open.

Here	 are	 some	 helpful	 hints	 for	 sustaining	 an	 open	 gaze	 while	 shifting
awareness.	Throughout	the	remainder	of	the	book,	as	you	do	different	glimpses,
these	hints	should	come	in	handy.	You	don’t	necessarily	need	to	experience	all	of
them	as	I	describe	them.	Use	any	of	the	following	hints	that	work	for	you:

• Relax	your	eyes	and	soften	your	gaze	so	that	your	eyesight	is	not
dominant	and	all	your	senses	are	experienced	equally.

• Instead	of	looking	through	a	narrow	tunnel	of	vision	or	in	a	pinpointed
way	at	one	object,	see	the	forest	as	well	as	one	tree.	Put	your	pointer
fingers	together	up	above	your	head	in	front	of	you	and	then	part	them	to
either	side,	drawing	a	big	circle	in	front	of	your	body.	Let	your	gaze	open
to	include	the	entire	circular	area	all	at	once	so	that	you	are	seeing	in	a
more	open	way.

• Rather	than	looking	at	one	object,	create	a	diffused	view	like	a	soft	lens
of	a	camera	by	looking	to	the	wider	scene	of	what’s	in	front	of	you.

• Extend	one	hand	in	front	of	you	with	your	palm	facing	you	at	the	distance
you	would	be	looking	at	a	friend’s	face.	Look	at	your	hand	and	the	space
around	it.	Now	drop	your	hand	and	look	at	the	open	space.	If	your	eyes
habitually	focus	on	the	first	object	you	see,	repeat	the	previous	steps	until
you	get	a	feel	for	resting	your	eyes	on	objectless	space.



• Notice	that	your	eyes	do	not	operate	like	your	hands.	You	do	not	go	out	to
see	something	as	your	hands	go	out	to	pick	something	up.	Your	eyes
work	in	a	similar	way	as	your	ears.	Just	as	your	ears	are	receiving	sound,
light	is	reflecting	off	objects	and	coming	into	your	eyes.	What	does	it	feel
like	when	seeing	is	receiving?

• Rest	back	as	the	light	comes	to	your	eyes	and	then	goes	to	open-hearted
awareness	while	all	your	senses	are	open.	Feel	like	you	are	equally	aware
of	all	your	senses	rather	than	focusing	on	seeing	or	thinking	as	primary.

• Feel	like	you	are	receiving	light	as	you	soften	your	eyes	while	having	a
wide-open	view	of	the	periphery.

GLIMPSE Awareness	of	Space

Local	awareness	is	malleable:	it	can	focus	and	join	with	one	of	our	senses,	or	it
can	unhook	and	move.	In	this	next	glimpse,	local	awareness	can	let	go	and	move
to	be	aware	of	objectless	space.

1. Unhook	local	awareness	from	thought	and	let	it	move	to	focus	on
hearing	the	sounds	coming	into	one	of	your	ears.

2. Focus	neither	on	who	is	hearing	nor	on	what	is	heard,	but	instead
just	the	sensation	of	hearing.

3. Notice	how	awareness	is	able	to	focus	on	the	vibration	of	sound	in
this	one	small	area.

4. Now	unhook	local	awareness	from	hearing	and	open	to	the	space	all
around	in	which	sound	is	coming	and	going.

5. Notice	the	movement	of	sounds	through	space.

6. Now	become	interested	in	the	objectless	space	through	which	the
sounds	are	moving.	Feel	as	if	local	awareness	has	opened	and	is
knowing	the	space	from	the	space.



7. Notice	the	effects	of	awareness	of	space.	

GLIMPSE Awareness	of	Awareness

In	this	glimpse,	local	awareness	moves	outward	into	space	and	then	discovers
spacious	awareness.	Here,	we	will	let	awareness	mingle	with	space	and	then
become	aware	of	itself.	Because	our	senses	tend	to	be	oriented	to	the	front	of	our
bodies,	it	might	be	easier	to	discover	spacious	awareness	when	focusing	on	the
space	at	the	sides	of	your	body	or	the	space	behind	your	body.

Now	let’s	have	local	awareness	unhook	from	thought,	notice	one	of	our
senses,	and	discover	local	awareness	aware	of	spacious	awareness.

1. Unhook	local	awareness	from	thought	and	have	awareness	move	to
hearing	the	sounds	coming	to	one	of	your	ears.

2. Don’t	focus	on	who	is	hearing	or	what	is	heard,	just	the	sensation	of
hearing.

3. Notice	how	local	awareness	is	able	to	focus	on	the	vibration	of
sound	at	one	ear.

4. Just	as	local	awareness	can	focus	on	a	small	area,	notice	how	local
awareness	can	now	unhook	and	open	into	the	space	in	which	sound
is	coming	and	going.

5. Rather	than	focusing	on	the	movement	of	sounds	through	space,	let
local	awareness	rest	in	the	open	space.

6. Local	awareness	opens	to	space	until	it	discovers	that	open	space	is
aware.

7. Feel	that	local	awareness	is	like	an	air	bubble	that	opens	and	blends
into	the	air,	mingling	with	the	field	of	spacious	awareness	that	is
already	aware.

8. Let	awareness	palpably	know	and	feel	itself	as	spacious	awareness,
without	looking	to	thought	or	sensation.



9. Stay	with	this	contentless,	timeless,	boundless	awareness	itself.
Remain	undistracted	without	effort.	Take	as	long	as	you	need	to	get	a
feel	for	spacious	awareness	being	aware	of	itself	without	any
physical	or	mental	references.	It	can	be	like	tuning	in	to	a	radio
station	of	silent	pure	awareness.	Only	the	knowing	from	awake
awareness	can	know	when	you’re	there.

10. Relax	into	abiding	as	this	field	aware	of	itself	without	subject	or
object	for	a	minute	or	two.

11. Notice	the	moving	thoughts	and	then	notice	stillness.	Now	rest	as
awareness	of	stillness	and	movement	that	is	silent,	thought-free,
timeless,	boundless,	contentless,	yet	fully	alert	and	aware.

12. Once	awake	awareness	is	primary,	notice	that	awake	awareness	is
spontaneously	aware	of	itself,	by	itself,	as	itself	without	any	effort.	

THE	FIRST	YOU-TURN

Through	 the	 next,	 and	 final,	 glimpse	 in	 the	 first	 foundation	 of	 effortless
mindfulness,	we’ll	explore	how	awareness	is	normally	hidden	in	the	background,
identified	with	 thought,	or	misunderstood	 to	be	a	way	of	perceiving	 the	 things
around	us.	In	many	meditation	systems,	awareness,	attention,	and	consciousness
are	 treated	 as	 if	 they’re	 the	 same.	 In	 Western	 psychology,	 and	 even	 in	 our
common	speech,	we	often	use	 the	words	aware	and	conscious	 as	 if	 they	mean
the	 same	 thing.	 For	 example,	 “I	 am	 aware	 of	 what	 I	 am	 reading”	 and	 “I	 am
conscious	 of	 what	 I	 am	 reading.”	 We	 also	 use	 awareness	 and	 attention
interchangeably,	 such	 as	 when	 we	 say,	 “Bring	 your	 attention	 to	 what	 you’re
hearing”	or	“Bring	your	awareness	to	what	you’re	hearing.”	When	we	conflate
these	terms,	we	are	regarding	awareness	as	a	limited	type	of	consciousness	that
is	“between”	self,	as	the	subject,	and	an	object,	as	in	“I	am	aware	of	that	cup.”	In
this	case,	awareness	is	the	link	between	you—the	one	who	is	looking—and	the
cup,	which	is	the	object	being	seen.

Awake	 awareness	 is	 different	 from	 attention	 or	 consciousness.	 Awake
awareness	is	not	the	intermediary	between	you	and	an	object;	it	is	the	foundation
of	 who	 you	 are	 and	 how	 you	 know.	 Our	 current	 sense	 of	 “I”	 is	 constructed
around	self-reflective	thinking,	so	when	we	think	we	are	something	smaller	than



awareness	 itself,	 awareness	 can	 get	 caught	 in	 the	 middle	 and	 reduced	 to	 a
function	or	tool	of	the	mind	and	identity.

Currently,	 awareness	 does	 not	 feel	 like	 the	 foundation	 of	 who	 I	 am	 but
instead	feels	like	it’s	in	the	middle:	“I	am	aware	of	seeing	the	cup.”	Here,	we	are
acting	as	if	awareness	were	a	functional	tool	of	“I,”	as	something	that	connects
me	and	objects	around	me	(that	are	perceived	as	outside	of	me):	“I	am	→	aware
of	→	seeing	the	cup.”	Let’s	look	more	closely	at	this	process:

• “I”	is	a	pattern	of	thought—small	mind—that	takes	itself	to	be	the
subject.

• “Am”	is	currently	connected	to	the	“I”	of	small	self	instead	of	awake
awareness.

• Awake	awareness	is	reduced	to	being	seen	simply	as	“attention,”	a	tool
for	focusing.	It’s	considered	to	be	an	intermediary	process	rather	than	the
foundation	of	who	I	am.

• “Seeing”	is	the	particular	sense	that	is	being	used	in	this	example.

• “The	cup”	is	the	object	of	focus—the	seen.

When	local	awareness	does	a	“you-turn”	and	looks	back,	it	sees	through	the
small	sense	of	self	and	discovers	that	awake	awareness	is	now	where	“I	am”	is
located.

The	you-turn	reverses	the	process	of	perception:	Awake	awareness	can	move
from	 being	 a	mode	 of	 perception	 between	 you	 and	 something	 you	 observe	 to
instead	turning	around	and	looking	back	through	the	mental	pattern	of	“I”	to	find
itself.	Awake	awareness	becomes	the	primary	location	of	observing.	The	“am”	is
no	 longer	 located	 within	 thinking	 but	 is	 now	 directly	 experienced	 as	 awake
awareness	aware	of	itself,	your	body,	and	the	cup.

GLIMPSE The	You-Turn

Find	an	object,	such	as	a	cup,	a	pen,	or	even	this	book,	place	it	in	front	of	you,
and	try	doing	the	you-turn.



1. Notice	that	you	are	aware	of	the	object	in	front	of	you.	Notice	the
feeling	of	going	out	from	your	body	toward	the	object.

2. Now	let	local	awareness	turn	back	to	the	space	between	you	and	the
object.

3. Let	local	awareness	rest	back	to	the	space	between	your	eyes.

4. Let	local	awareness	rest	back	to	the	space	between	your	ears.

5. Now	let	awareness	rest	back	behind	your	body	into	the	space
behind.

6. As	local	awareness	rests	back	behind	your	body,	notice	that	spacious
awake	awareness	is	already	aware	and	feeling	forward	through	your
body	and	to	the	object	without	using	concentration	or	attention.

7. Just	see	and	be.	Experience	awareness	of	awareness	as	spacious	and
pervasive.	

PRACTICES	FOR	THE	SECOND	FOUNDATION	OF	EFFORTLESS
MINDFULNESS

Awake	Awareness	as	Aware	of	Itself
As	local	awareness	becomes	aware	of	spacious	awareness,	it	begins	to	recognize
itself.	Local	 awareness	 and	 spacious	 awareness	 then	 unite,	 realizing	 they	 have
always	been	united,	 like	an	air	bubble	bursting	 into	air.	From	 this	perspective,
there	 is	 no	 longer	 a	 subject	 knowing	 an	 object;	 there	 is	 just	 awake	 awareness
knowing	itself.	Awake	awareness	knows	itself	by	being	itself.

Awake	 awareness	 is	 infinite,	 invisible,	 inherent,	 and	 most	 importantly,
intelligent.	However,	what	 it	 knows	has	no	 conceptual	 information.	There	 is	 a
new	kind	of	direct	knowing	that	starts	with	not-knowing,	which	becomes	a	not-
knowing	that	knows.

This	awareness	of	awareness	is	what	gives	us	the	opportunity	to	experience
essential	freedom,	the	first	glimpse	of	who	we	essentially	are:	boundless	ground
that	needs	nothing	and	can’t	 be	hurt	 by	 anything.	 It	 can	 feel	 like	 such	a	 relief
from	difficulties	in	life	that	one	of	my	students	who	had	this	experience	asked,



“Is	this	legal?”
Importantly,	we	can’t	live	exclusively	in	a	field	of	awake	awareness	because

it	 is	not	possible	 to	 function	 in	 the	physical	world	 from	a	perspective	and	Self
that	 is	 mainly	 nonphysical.	 Furthermore,	 we	 don’t	 want	 to	 get	 stranded	 at	 a
waystation,	 halfway	 home.	 That	 said,	 the	 new	 way	 of	 experiencing	 ourselves
that	we’ll	be	coming	into	as	we	glimpse	the	following	foundations	of	effortless
mindfulness	 requires	 the	direct	 experience	of	 this	 stage	of	 awareness	 knowing
awareness.

One	 way	 to	 check	 if	 we	 are	 in	 the	 second	 foundation	 of	 effortless
mindfulness	 is	 to	 inquire:	 “Am	 I	 aware	 of	 spacious	 awareness,	 or	 is	 spacious
awareness	aware	of	itself?”	Be	with	this	inquiry	and	experiment	with	it	until	you
can	start	feeling	a	shift	 in	your	perspective	so	that	awareness	is	now	resting	as
itself.	In	Tibetan	Buddhism,	the	first	foundation,	awareness	of	awareness,	would
be	 considered	 the	 stage	 of	 recognition,	 and	 the	 second	 foundation,	 awake
awareness	aware	of	 itself,	would	be	known	as	realization.	You	are	not	 the	one
experiencing	awake	awareness;	you	are	that.	It	is	important	to	have	this	shift	of
subject-object,	 this	 shift	 in	 realizing	who	 is	 “you.”	 This	 is	 a	 shift	 out	 of	 self-
center	 and	 identity.	 If	 you	 can	 abide	 as	 awareness	 of	 itself—contentless,
timeless,	 boundless,	 knowing—for	 even	 three	 seconds	 to	 three	 minutes,	 that
experience	 can	 shift	 you	 into	 realization.	 To	 be	 free	 of	 our	 thought-based
operating	system,	we	just	need	to	realize	ourselves	as	spacious	awareness	until	it
becomes	our	new	boundless	ground.

GLIMPSE Mind,	the	Gap

This	glimpse	is	about	finding	awake	awareness	in	the	gap	between	thoughts.	You
may	be	familiar	with	a	meditation	practice	in	which	you	repeat	a	word	or	a
sacred	phrase,	known	as	a	mantra.	Instead,	in	this	glimpse	you	focus	not	on	the
word	or	its	meaning	but	on	the	space—and	awareness—between	the	words.	Give
your	thinking	mind	the	simple	task	of	repeating	a	word	to	occupy	it	while	you
become	aware	of	the	gaps	between	your	thoughts.	As	you	explore	the	presence
of	awareness	in	this	space,	you	may	begin	to	notice	that	awake	awareness	is
already	aware.

1. Begin	by	silently	and	slowly	repeating	in	your	mind,	“Blah,”	with
some	space	in	between.	“Blah	.	.	.	blah	.	.	.	blah.”	Allow	the	word



blah	to	float	through	the	space	of	your	mind	like	a	feather.	Don’t
create	any	other	thoughts	or	be	interested	in	any	thoughts	that	arise.
Let	blah	occupy	all	the	interest	and	activity	of	thinking.

2. Begin	to	be	aware	of	the	thought-free	space	between	the	words:
“Blah”	.	.	.	space	.	.	.	“blah”	.	.	.	space	.	.	.	“blah”	.	.	.	space.

3. Next,	become	more	interested	in	the	quality	of	the	space	between
the	words.	See	if	you	notice	that	the	space	is	not	just	a	gap	but	that
the	space	itself	is	aware.	“Blah”	.	.	.	aware	space	.	.	.	“blah”	.	.	.
aware	space	.	.	.	“blah”	.	.	.	aware	space.

4. Feel	the	spacious	awareness	in	between	the	words	and	all	around
them	as	a	field	of	awake	awareness	in	which	the	word	blah	and
other	thoughts	now	appear.	Feel	your	mind	not	as	a	solid	thing	but
as	clear,	open,	and	aware.

5. Stop	saying	“blah”	to	yourself	and	just	feel	into	the	space	you	have
been	noticing.	Feel	and	be	this	awareness	that	is	awake	and	alert.
Notice	that	you	don’t	need	to	go	to	thought	to	be	aware.	Notice	the
ease	and	natural	welcoming	of	all	experiences	that	arise.

While	doing	this	practice,	you	may	notice	that	there	are	two	types	of	space.
One	is	physical,	such	as	the	space	in	the	room	you	are	in—the	absence	of	objects
and	content.	In	art,	this	is	called	“negative	space”—the	space	between	things.
The	other	type	of	space	is	presence,	which	is	aware	and	awake.	It	is	not	just
empty—it	is	a	positive	space.	Awake	awareness	is	alive	and	conscious.

Whether	there	are	thoughts	or	no	thoughts	on	the	screen	of	your	mind,	there
is	a	background	knowing	that	can	move	to	the	foreground.	This	silent,	spacious
awake	awareness	doesn’t	use	thought	to	look	to	other	thoughts	to	confirm	that
you	know	what	you	know.	

GLIMPSE Awareness	Yoga

In	yoga	training,	one	is	taught	how	to	move	the	body	to	feel	renewed,	refreshed,
balanced,	and	unified.	Here,	we	will	learn	to	move	awareness	for	the	same
purposes.	Use	these	four	pointers	one	at	a	time	to	shift	your	view,	pausing	in



between	to	experience	what	they	point	to.	Instead	of	trying	to	understand	the
meaning	of	each	pointer,	just	be	curious.	Let	your	awareness	look.	Repeat	each
one	as	many	times	as	you	like.	You	can	say	these	phrases	with	your	eyes	open	or
closed,	as	you	prefer.	The	important	thing	is	to	shift	awareness	to	look	and	to
feel	where	you’re	looking	from	after	you	shift.

1. Look	from	awareness	and	say	to	yourself:	I	am	curious	what	the
next	thought	will	be.

2. Now	look	from	awareness	to	experience	the	space	through	which
thoughts	and	sounds	are	moving.

3. Now	look	from	awareness	to	see:	What	is	aware	of	space	and
moving	thoughts?

4. Now	look	from	awareness	and	rest	as	the	awake	awareness	that	is
aware	of	itself,	by	itself,	as	itself.	

GLIMPSE Infinite	No-Self

In	this	practice,	we	shift	away	from	the	mindful	witness	and	any	tendency	to
contract	into	a	point	of	view.	The	feeling	of	being	a	self	is	the	feeling	of	being	an
observer	with	a	particular	location.	No-self	is	the	realization	that	we	are
everywhere,	nowhere,	and	here.	We	can	let	go	of	the	tendency	to	construct	a
subject-versus-object	view	or	holding	on	to	positive	qualities	that	arise—like
bliss,	clarity,	and	non-thought.	We	no	longer	look	from	a	particular	location	of
the	ego,	the	meditator,	or	sky-like	spacious	awareness.	When	we	shift	away	from
the	self-location,	we	can	let	everything	be	as	it	is,	and	paradoxically,	we	will	feel
ordinary	in	an	open-hearted	way.

Here,	we	will	check	for	any	remnant	of	the	location	of	an	ego,	meditator,	or
“small	self”	viewpoint	so	awake	awareness	can	become	aware	of	itself.

1. As	you	take	the	next	breath,	focus	on	the	feeling	of	breath	moving	in
your	body.	Unhook	local	awareness	from	the	focusing	and	have	it
search	your	entire	body-mind	from	head	to	toe	to	see	if	a	self	as	an
object	or	subject	can	be	found.	Allow	the	awareness	to	scan	quickly
and	thoroughly	until	nothing	is	found.



2. Upon	not	finding	a	“self”	located	in	any	one	place	or	looking	from
any	one	place,	notice	how	awake	awareness	and	aliveness	are	free
and	unconfined	and	seamlessly	permeating.

3. Notice	that	the	field	of	open	and	empty	awareness	is	aware	of	itself,
by	itself,	as	itself.	The	awake	field	is	infinitely	aware	from
everywhere,	interconnected	to	everything.	The	ocean	of	awareness
knows	all	waves	from	inside	the	wave.

4. Feel	that	there	is	no	boundary,	no	center,	and	yet	observing	is
occurring	with	no	observer.

5. Notice	the	arising	of	your	human	body	out	of	formless	awake
awareness,	moment	to	moment.

6. Notice	the	quality	of	the	Now,	where	everything	is	here	all	at	once.

7. Let	everything	be	as	it	is,	ordinary	and	free.	

PRACTICES	FOR	THE	THIRD	FOUNDATION	OF	EFFORTLESS
MINDFULNESS

Awareness	from	Awake	Awareness-Energy
The	way	that	I	experience,	practice,	and	teach	this	third	foundation	has	changed
in	 some	ways	 since	 I	wrote	my	 first	book,	Shift	 into	Freedom.	My	experience
and	 thus	 description	 of	 this	 foundation	 has	 been	 positively	 influenced	 by	 my
colleague,	 with	 whom	 I	 co-teach,	 Anna-Lisa	 Adelberg,	 director	 of	 Luminous
Awareness	 Institute.	 She	 helped	 experientially	 clarify	 this	 important	 phase	 of
awareness-energy,	 and	 I	 am	 able	 to	 describe	 and	 invite	 others	 into	 it	 in	more
depth	now.

Anna-Lisa	uses	a	 reference	 to	“Goldilocks	and	 the	Three	Bears”	 to	explain
the	feeling	of	awake	awareness-energy:	“When	you’re	 too	 identified	with	your
experience,	then	it	feels	like	‘porridge	too	hot.’	When	you	are	too	disidentified	as
a	detached	witness,	it	feels	like	‘porridge	too	cold.’	When	you	shift	into	the	view
from	awake	awareness-energy,	 it	 feels	 like	‘porridge	 just	 right.’”	When	we	are
truly	 looking	 from	 awake	 awareness-energy,	 we	 are	 not	 a	 separate,	 detached
witness	 of	 objects	 moving	 through	 space.	 Everything	 that	 appears	 is



interconnected	energetic	aliveness	because	the	realization	is	that	energy	is	made
of	awake	awareness.	The	feeling	is	like	the	ocean	of	awareness	is	arising	as	this
wave	 of	 my	 body	 and	 mind,	 which	 are	 not	 separate	 from	 the	 awake	 field	 of
awareness-energy.

The	first	 two	radical	 shifts	of	perspective	are	moving	out	of	small	 self	and
small	mind	to	then	being	located	as	spacious	awake	awareness.	This	next	shift	is
to	 experience	 everything	 as	 an	 interconnected,	 dynamic	 field	 of	 awareness-
energy.	An	important	distinction	that	is	not	often	made	is	that	the	view	from	any
no-self,	open-sky	witness	 that	 experiences	 thoughts	 and	appearances	as	 if	 they
were	birds	and	clouds	moving	through	the	sky	is	a	meditation	state	rather	 than
awareness-energy.	 When	 you	 are	 aware	 from	 awareness-energy,	 you	 are
connected	with	every	experience	rather	 than	detached	from	them.	Certainly,	on
the	 visual	 and	 physical,	 conventional	 level,	 we	 experience	 things	 as	 separate
objects.	 However,	 we	 are	 talking	 about	 a	 simultaneous	 perception	 of
interconnectedness	 on	 the	 most	 essential	 level,	 which	 has	 been	 called
“emptiness-appearance.”

We	can	remain	effortlessly	focused	in	awake-energy	because	 its	 foundation
is	awareness-energy	rather	than	a	changing	mind	or	a	detached	mindful	witness.
From	 here,	 we	 can	 practice	 effortless	 mindfulness	 embodied,	 as	 we	 observe
thoughts,	 sensations,	 feelings,	 and	mind	 objects.	We	 see	 that	 thoughts	 are	 not
who	we	are,	but	we	also	have	the	insight	that	they	are	made	of	awareness,	and
there	is	no	need	to	get	rid	of	them.

We	 learn	 to	 trust	 that	 knowing	 is	 happening	 from	 the	 intelligence	 of
awareness-energy,	and	we	no	longer	need	to	return	to	conceptual	thinking	for	a
second	 opinion	 or	 to	 create	 a	 “thinker.”	 Once	 this	 important	 foundation	 is
established,	 we	 can	move	 to	 the	 new,	 daily	 operating	 system	 of	 open-hearted
awareness	in	the	world.

This	 is	 important	 because	 many	 people	 I	 meet	 have	 a	 “waking	 up”
experience	but	lapse	back	into	a	mindful	witness,	detached	observer,	or	big-sky
mind.	Our	interest	is	not	waking	up	from	our	sense	of	self	into	separation	from
daily	life	but	instead	waking	into	a	fully	alive	human	life.	The	stage	of	awake-
energy	is	an	integration	in	which	we	discover	that	energy	is	made	of	awareness,
so	we	can	feel	embodied	and	alive	without	getting	stuck	in	a	detached	witness	or
becoming	reidentified.	Awareness-energy	is	often	called	“simultaneous	mind”	or
the	 stage	 of	 “one	 taste”	 in	 the	 Mahamudra	 tradition	 because	 all	 unique
appearances	have	the	same	essential	flavor	of	awake	awareness.	This	may	seem
esoteric	at	first,	but	give	it	a	try,	and	you’ll	find	that	awareness-energy	leads	to	a



sense	of	feeling	supported	and	of	well-being.
Here,	 from	 the	 intelligence	 of	 awareness-energy,	 we	 feel	 connected	 with

everyone	and	everything.	There	is	a	sense	of	being	simultaneously	everywhere,
nowhere,	and	very	much	here.	A	sense	of	being	interconnected	is	a	unity	feeling
that	begins	to	be	embodied	and	grounded	in	a	new	sense	of	safety.

GLIMPSE Effortless	Focus

Unlike	the	freedom	of	awake	awareness,	when	we	discover	awareness-energy,
we	feel	a	unity	with	everything.	When	we	are	looking	from	awareness-energy,
we	can	focus	effortlessly.

1. Begin	by	taking	a	nice,	easy	breath.	Notice	the	sense	of	thinking
happening	in	your	head.	Have	local	awareness	unhook	from	thinking
and	drop	down	to	feel	your	jaw	from	within	your	jaw.	Notice	that
awareness	is	not	looking	up	to	thought	nor	stretching	attention	down.
Feel	local	awareness	drop	below	your	neck	to	an	open	space	within
your	body	where	you	are	directly	aware	of	space,	vibration,	and
awareness.

2. Now	open	awareness	out	to	the	space	in	the	room	and	become	aware
of	mingling	awareness	with	space.	Feel	a	sense	of	open	space	that	is
silently	aware.

3. Now	see	what	it’s	like	to	be	aware	of	spacious	awake	awareness	as
boundlessly	as	possible.	Notice	that	this	boundless,	timeless
awareness	is	aware	of	itself,	by	itself,	as	itself,	without	any	help.

4. Notice	that	your	view	is	as	spacious	awake	awareness	for	a	moment
or	two.	Feel	that	when	you	turn	to	be	aware	of	anything,	you	are
aware	from	a	field	of	interconnected,	all-pervasive,	intelligent
awareness-energy.

5. Rather	than	looking	from	the	sky	of	spacious	awareness,	notice	the
feeling	of	interconnection	with	sound,	light,	and	energy	on	a	subtle
level.	Feel	as	if	everything	that	arises	is	made	of	awake	awareness.
Feel	the	unity	of	awareness-energy	as	you	perceive	that	you	are	not



separate	from	anything.

6. From	the	field	of	awareness-energy,	notice	the	feeling	of	your	whole
body	arising	like	a	wave	from	the	ocean	of	awareness-energy.	From
here,	become	interested	in	one	point	of	contact	within	your	body
where	your	breath	is	arising	at	your	belly	or	your	chest.	Begin	to
focus	on	the	sensation	and	movement	of	your	breath	in	this	small
area.	Once	you	feel	your	belly	or	chest	begin	to	rise,	label	it	“one.”

7. Then	feel	a	natural	pause	at	the	top	of	the	in-breath.	Be	aware	of
awareness-energy	from	all	around	and	within	the	pause	before	the
out-breath.

8. Then	feel	the	point	of	contact	with	your	skin	as	your	breath	goes	out
and	label	it	“two.”

9. Feel	the	pause	before	the	next	in-breath	and	rest	in	the	unity	of
embodied	awareness-energy.

10. Your	breath	is	happening	by	itself,	and	awareness-energy	is	aware	by
itself	without	creating	a	point	of	view.	Continue	to	focus	effortlessly
as	you	label	each	following	breath,	in	and	out,	with	a	number	up	to
thirty.

11. Shift	into	the	view	from	the	intelligence	of	the	all-pervasive
awareness-energy	as	thoughts,	sensations,	and	emotions	arise	as
awareness-energy.	Simply	allow	them	to	appear	and	go	nowhere
even	as	they	change.	Notice	any	tendency	to	become	drawn	in	by
pleasant	content	or	to	contract	against	unpleasant	feelings.	Feel	your
unity	with	all	things,	boundless,	timeless,	and	dynamically	energetic,
while	effortlessly	focusing	on	your	simple	breath.	

GLIMPSE Panoramic	Awareness

There	is	a	Tibetan	Buddhist	practice	called	“sky-gazing.”	You	physically	go	to	a
place	with	a	wide-open	vista,	and	you	become	interested	in	looking	at	the	open
space.	The	exercise	moves	from	being	vision	based	to	being	awareness	based.



First	you	notice	the	open	space	in	front	of	you,	then	within	you,	and	then	behind
you.	This	gives	you	an	experience	of	awareness	of	awareness.

In	this	effortless	mindfulness	glimpse,	you	will	move	awareness	in	a	full
circle,	starting	at	the	front	of	your	body,	moving	to	the	sides	and	then	behind	you
so	that	you	feel	a	360-degree	panoramic	awareness.	Then	you	become	aware
from	awareness-energy	back	to	your	thoughts,	feelings,	sensations,	and	body.

1. Sit	comfortably	with	your	eyes	open	and	look	directly	in	front	of
you.	Allow	your	eyes	to	look	into	space	rather	than	focusing	on	one
particular	thing.

2. Without	raising	your	chin,	bring	your	gaze	slightly	upward,	as	if	you
are	on	a	beach,	looking	at	the	open	sky.

3. Without	moving	your	eyes	or	head,	begin	to	open	local	awareness
outward	to	both	sides	so	that	your	peripheral	vision	expands	slowly
and	gently.

4. As	your	peripheral	vision	widens,	allow	awareness	to	continue	to
open	gently	around	toward	the	sides	of	your	head.

5. Now	allow	local	awareness	to	unhook	from	seeing	to	become	aware
of	the	space	at	the	sides	of	your	head	through	which	sound	is	coming
and	going.

6. Continue	to	open	local	awareness	to	the	felt	sense	of	space	behind
your	body	where	sound	is	moving.

7. Feel	the	sense	of	spacious	awareness	all	around.

8. Notice	how	your	view	is	open	in	a	panoramic	way.

9. Open	local	awareness	beyond	thought	and	sensations	until	it	mingles
with	spacious	awake	awareness	that’s	already	awake	by	itself.	Let
awake	awareness	rest	as	itself.

10. Inquire:	Am	I	aware	of	spacious	awareness,	or	is	spacious	awareness
aware	of	itself,	by	itself?



11. Notice	how	spacious	awake	awareness	is	timeless,	contentless,	silent,
and	boundless.

12. As	you	begin	to	be	aware	from	the	panoramic	field	of	awareness-
energy,	notice	how	you	are	subtly	interconnected	with	sound,	light,
and	movement.

13. Feel	the	ocean	of	awareness-energy	arising	outside	and	within	your
body	as	a	wave.	Feel	the	balance	of	being	aware	equally	outside	and
within	your	body.

14. Remain	undistracted,	without	effort.

15. Breathe	in	and	allow	a	smile	to	come	to	your	face	and	then	feel
spacious	and	pervasive	awareness-energy	seamlessly	all	around	and
within.

16. Notice	how	your	ears	are	receiving	sound	without	effort.

17. Notice,	in	the	same	way	as	sound	comes	to	your	ears,	that	light
reflects	off	things	and	comes	to	your	eyes.	Let	your	vision	relax	and
experience	seeing	as	receiving.

18. Remain	undistracted	as	you	feel	the	awareness-energy	equally
outside	and	within	and	the	ability	to	effortlessly	focus	on	your	breath
as	it	arises	and	passes,	moment	to	moment,	in	the	timeless	here	and
now	of	seamless	awareness-energy.	

PRACTICES	FOR	THE	FOURTH	FOUNDATION	OF	EFFORTLESS
MINDFULNESS

Awake	Awareness-Energy	Embodied
In	 the	 fourth	 foundation,	we	arrive	at	 the	Ground	of	Being.	When	people	 first
move	 from	 all-pervasive	 awareness-energy	 to	 the	 Ground	 of	 Being,	 which	 is
awareness-energy	embodied,	I	ask	them,	“How	does	it	feel?”	Many	people	say,
“It	feels	grounded.”	When	I	ask	them,	“What	is	the	ground	made	of?”	they	look
puzzled	 at	 first,	 but	 then,	 after	 a	 moment,	 say,	 “Awareness,”	 “Emptiness,”



“Nothing,”	 “Everything,”	 “Connection,”	 or	 “Flow.”	 They	 go	 on	 to	 describe
having	a	profound	feeling	of	safety,	effortlessness,	and	knowing	that	all	is	well,
using	phrases	like,	“Nothing	can	threaten	who	I	am”	and	“Everything	is	okay.”
This	is	the	source	and	resource	of	effortless	mindfulness.

People’s	 first	 association	 with	 the	 word	 ground	 is	 generally	 of	 something
physical	and	solid.	Although	the	ground	of	your	being	is	not	physically	solid	like
the	 earth	under	your	 feet,	 it	 is	 supportive,	 foundational,	 and	 safe.	Unlike	what
you	may	have	imagined	your	foundation	to	be,	the	Ground	of	Being	is	made	of
awareness,	 safety,	 interconnectedness,	 well-being,	 and	 flow.	 The	 Ground	 of
Being	 is	 the	meeting	place	between	 the	boundless	ground	of	awake	awareness
and	 your	 human	 body	 and	 personality.	 Boundless	 ground	 plus	 human	 equals
human	 being.	 Asked	 about	 this	 experience	 while	 immersed	 in	 it,	 one	 of	 my
students	reported,	“I	feel	profound	well-being,	an	innocence,	and	a	sense	that	all
is	well.”

Awake	 awareness-energy	 is	 embodied	 not	 just	 as	 your	 body	 but	 as	 an
interconnection	 with	 every	 body	 and	 every	 thing.	 The	 Ground	 of	 Being	 is
experienced	not	only	inside	your	body	but	also	all	around.	The	new	feeling	is	not
that	 “awareness	 is	 in	my	body”	 but	 that	 your	 body	 is	 arising	 from	 awareness.
There	is	a	deep	restfulness	as	well	as	a	new	motivation	to	engage	in	life	from	a
natural	flow	state.

There	 is	 a	 new	 sense	 of	 nonconceptual	 knowing	 that	 has	 qualities	 of	 non-
fear,	non-shame,	non-worry,	non-blame,	and	non-projection.	Our	intelligence	is
no	 longer	 caught	 in	 an	 either/or	 bind.	 It	 is	 an	 intuitive	 intelligence.	 From	 the
Ground	 of	 Being,	 there	 is	 a	 sense	 of	 boundlessness,	 and	 yet	 you	 have	 more
ability	to	set	healthy	boundaries.

Until	awake	awareness	is	embodied,	the	small	self	will	activate	the	nervous
system	 to	 continue,	 to	no	 avail,	 to	 seek	 safety	 for	 itself.	Being	 is	 the	 essential
“okay-ness”	 that	 is	 already	 here.	 When	 the	 nervous	 system	 and	 instincts	 are
connected	to	this	essential	“okay-ness,”	there	is	a	huge	sense	of	relief,	deep	rest,
and	 well-being	 from	 which	 all	 thoughts	 and	 actions	 begin	 to	 spring.	 After
making	 a	 connection	with	 the	Ground	of	Being,	 one	 student	 reported,	 “I	 have
had	anxiety	dreams	all	my	life.	These	ranged	from	not	being	prepared	for	a	test
to	the	impending	death	of	members	of	my	family	or	myself.	When	I	shifted	into
the	 Ground	 of	 Being	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 I	 stopped	 having	 anxiety	 dreams	 that
night,	and	now	I	haven’t	had	one	for	 the	 last	year	and	a	half.”	When	 trying	 to
manage	 their	busy,	modern	 lives	 from	small	 self	 and	 small	mind,	people	often
experience	 free-floating	 anxiety	 throughout	 the	 day.	 The	 solution	 to	 this	 is



moving	to	the	Ground	of	Being,	which	we	could	call	“free-floating	well-being.”
Here	is	a	longer	description	of	the	Ground	of	Being	that	a	student	sent	to	me:

When	I	experience	the	Ground	of	Being:	I	am	at	peace	with	life	and
accept	everything	as	it	is.	I	don’t	feel	like	anything	needs	to	change.	I
already	feel	comfortable	and	safe,	as	if	I	am	held	by	something	larger
than	myself.	I	feel	my	“place	in	the	order	of	things.”	I	am
interconnected	and	present,	without	having	to	“do”	anything	to	earn
it,	keep	it	that	way,	or	make	sure	things	are	okay.	I	have	that	feeling
of	“nowhere	to	go	and	nothing	to	do,”	even	though	I	am	still	fully
capable	of	going	anywhere	and	doing	anything—in	other	words,	I	am
able	to	move	through	my	everyday	life	fully	connected	from	the
Ground	of	Being.

People	who	learn	this	foundation	of	awake	awareness-energy	embodied	are
astounded	 that	 they	 can	 immediately	 shift	 into	 this	 Ground	 of	 Being	 level	 of
awareness-energy	 while	 doing	 everyday	 activities	 in	 a	 stress-free	 flow—with
their	eyes	open.	The	Ground	of	Being	is	the	ultimate	well-being	that	is	here	no
matter	what	difficulties	occur	 in	our	daily	 lives,	 though	it	can	sometimes	be	 in
the	background.

In	 this	 fourth	 foundation,	 we	 become	 aware	 that	 we	 are	 both	 infinite	 and
finite.	It	feels	like	the	ocean	of	awareness-energy	is	arising	as	the	wave	of	a	new
sense	 of	 “me.”	 It’s	 also	 important	 to	 note	 another	 paradox	 about	 awareness-
energy:	 in	 the	 fourth	 foundation	 there	 is	 simultaneously	a	 sense	of	 energy	and
flow	 (movement)	 and	 of	 stability	 (stillness).	 The	 stillness	 is	 now	 also	 present
because	 of	 the	 Ground	 of	 Being—the	 stable	 fullness,	 the	 ground	 that	 is
everywhere,	 that	 you	can	 relax	 into	 and	 feel	 safe	 in,	 that	 you	can	 feel	 in	your
body.	But	what	about	 the	energy?	Many	people	begin	 to	 feel	a	 subtle	sense	of
bliss	 arising	 both	within	 their	 body	 and	 as	 if	 the	world	 is	 alive	 and	 sparkling.
This	is	the	movement,	feminine,	dancing	aliveness	that	is	called	“shakti”	in	India
and	“emptiness-bliss”	in	Tibetan	Buddhism.	This	is	a	real	and	natural	quality	of
this	foundation’s	unfolding	that	is	different	from	blissful	pleasure	that	comes	and
goes.

You	may	 remember	 that	we	explored	 the	“flow	state”	 in	 chapter	1.	 It	 is	 in
this	 fourth	 foundation	 of	 awareness-energy	 embodied	 that	 you	 feel	 both	 the
ground	and	the	flow	state,	or	that	feeling	of	“being	in	the	zone.”	This	is	the	other
paradox	of	the	fourth	foundation:	a	new	kind	of	stillness	and	 flow.	In	this	flow



state,	 you’re	 effortlessly	moving	 around,	 doing	 activities	 in	which	 time	 slows
down;	 your	 concept	 of	 self	 is	 interconnected	with	 everything	 around	you;	 and
you’re	 embodied	 and	 operating	 from	 a	 nonconceptual	 intelligence	 that	 knows
just	what	to	do.

GLIMPSE Awake	Awareness-Energy	Embodied

Experiencing	the	ground	of	awareness-energy	simultaneously	within	and	around
your	body	can	decrease	the	self-referencing	mind-wandering	associated	with	the
default-mode	network.	This	type	of	mind-wandering	ceases	when	the	two
networks	of	the	inward	and	the	outward	focus	become	synchronized,	and	we
become	more	present	and	in	our	body.

In	this	practice,	we	are	shifting	from	a	detached	witnessing	self	to	embodied
awake	awareness.	Try	this	mindful	glimpse	a	number	of	times	until	you	get	the
feel	of	the	equal	balance	of	awareness	outside	and	within	as	a	continuous	field.
Once	you	get	this	for	about	three	minutes,	it	seems	to	break	the	default	mode
habit,	and	most	people	experience	a	stable,	undistracted	flow.

1. Unhook	local	awareness	from	thought	and	have	it	shift	to	hearing
from	one	ear.

2. Notice	the	effect	of	awareness	focused	on	a	small	area	and	simply
hearing.

3. Just	as	the	local	awareness	can	focus	on	a	small	area,	experience
local	awareness	opening	to	the	space	outside	your	body	where	sound
is	coming	and	going.

4. Instead	of	focusing	on	what	is	moving	through	the	space,	allow	local
awareness	to	become	interested	in	space.

5. Notice	the	shift	from	awareness	of	space	to	noticing	that	space	is
aware.	Pause	and	allow	this	tuning	in	to	spacious	awake	awareness
to	happen	clearly.

6. Allow	awareness	to	be	aware	of	itself	as	a	contentless,	formless,
timeless	field	of	awake	awareness.	Allow	your	sense	of	awake



awareness	to	be	boundless.

7. Feel	the	discovery	that	you	have	let	go	of	small	self	and	are	now
located	in	this	boundless	awake	awareness.	When	you	turn	to	be
aware	from	awake	awareness,	notice	that	the	field	of	awareness-
energy	is	already	connected	to	everything	all	around	and	within	your
body	as	an	ocean	of	awareness	that	is	arising	as	waves	of	aliveness
and	sensation.

8. Looking	with	awareness,	inquire:	Where	am	I	aware	from?

9. Feel	the	unified	field	that	is	awareness-energy	both	outside	and
within	simultaneously.

10. Feel	the	seamless	unity	of	awareness-energy	that	has	no	outside	or
inside.

11. Without	going	up	to	thought,	down	to	sleep,	or	back	into	a
daydream,	stay	with	the	knowing	from	the	field	of	awareness-energy
that	is	naturally	inclusive	and	undistracted.	Feel	the	movement	of
sound	and	breath	both	outside	and	inside.	Feel	that	awareness-energy
is	equally	aware	seamlessly	outside	and	inside,	without	having	to
alternate.

12. Marinate	in	this	effortless	mindfulness.	

GLIMPSE The	Now

The	most	classical	form	of	Self-inquiry	is	to	ask,	“Who	am	I?”	Adyashanti’s
teachings	help	us	realize	awake	awareness	as	source	by	asking,	“What	am	I?”
Most	of	the	glimpses	that	I	have	been	presenting	have	focused	on	shifting	out	of
the	small	self	and	the	meditative	point	of	view	by	asking,	“Where	am	I?”	When
we	transition	back	from	boundless,	timeless	awake	awareness	to	awake
awareness-energy	embodied,	we	begin	to	feel	that	the	Now	is	both	timeless	and
able	to	function	with	conventional	clock	time.	If	we	want	to	learn	to	be	in	the
Now,	we	can	ask,	“When	am	I?”

Here	we	can	begin	to	experience	the	Now	with	one	of	the	most	famous



Mahamudra	instructions,	based	on	the	teachings	of	the	first-century	Indian
Tantric	practitioner	and	spiritual	adept	Tilopa,	called	“Six	Points	of	Tilopa”	or
“Six	Ways	of	Resting	the	Mind	in	Its	Natural	Condition.”	It	advises:

Don’t	recall. Let	go	of	the	past.

Don’t	anticipate. Let	go	of	what	may	come	in	the	future.

Don’t	think. Let	go	of	what	is	happening	in	the	present.

Don’t	examine. Don’t	particularize	or	analyze.

Don’t	control. Don’t	try	to	make	anything	happen.

Rest. Relax	naturally,	right	Now.2

The	 Now	 is	 the	 timeless	 time	 of	 awake	 awareness	 that	 includes	 the	 three
times	of	past,	present,	and	future.	We	can	learn	not	 to	collapse	into	 identifying
with	one	particular	time	or	state	of	mind.	We	can	familiarize	ourselves	with	the
view	from	the	Now,	which	experiences	everything	all	at	once.	Here	is	a	modern
version	of	this	to	help	you	experience	being	in	the	Now.

1. Right	now,	let	local	awareness	unhook	from	thought	and	drop	below
your	neck.

2. Feel	the	thoughts	that	come	and	go,	the	tick-tock	of	each	moment
appearing	and	disappearing.

3. Open	to	the	now	that	doesn’t	get	stuck	in	any	present	moment.	Feel
from	timeless,	spacious	awareness	that	includes	past,	present,	and
future.

4. Be	aware	as	each	new	present	moment	arrives	and	passes.

5. Notice	that	being	fully	here	and	now—from	awake	awareness—
there	is	no	problem	with	being	aware	of	the	past,	present,	or	future.

6. Inquire:	What’s	here	now?

Don’t	go	up	to	refer	to	thought.



Don’t	go	down	to	fall	asleep.

Don’t	go	back	to	refer	to	the	past.

Don’t	go	even	one	moment	forward	to	anticipate	the	future.

Don’t	cling	to	the	passing	present	moments.

Don’t	look	out	to	the	world	to	create	a	subject-object	relationship.

Don’t	fall	into	daydreaming.

7. Feel	the	magnetic	pull	forward	to	the	future,	the	pull	back	to	the	past,
and	the	pull	to	try	to	hold	on	to	the	present.

8. Rest	your	awareness	equally	inside	and	outside.	Open	to	the	Now
and	notice	the	timeless,	continuous	field	of	awareness-energy	in
which	all	of	these	present	moments	of	experience	are	appearing	and
disappearing.

9. Let	go,	relax,	and	be	in	the	all-at-once-ness	of	the	Now.

10. Without	going	to	thought,	what’s	here	now	when	there	is	no	problem
to	solve?	

GLIMPSE Emotions	as	Awareness-Energy

When	you	start	this	exercise,	bring	your	awareness	within	your	body	and	find
any	emotion	that	is	there	now.	You	can	do	this	exercise	with	any	emotion,
pleasant	or	unpleasant,	but	when	you	do	this	for	the	first	time,	please	try	it	with
an	unpleasant	emotion.	If	you	don’t	have	an	unpleasant	emotion	available,
choose	the	unpleasant	emotion	that	you	encounter	most	often	in	your	life.	If
necessary,	you	can	go	to	a	memory	or	a	recent	situation	in	your	life	to	bring	up
an	unpleasant	emotion.	By	practicing	this,	you	will	learn	that	you	can	feel	sad
without	being	sad,	anger	without	being	angry,	and	more.

1. Find	an	emotion—fear,	anger,	or	jealousy,	for	instance—and	begin



by	feeling	it	fully.	(I’ll	use	sadness	as	an	example	in	the	following
steps;	you	can	substitute	whatever	emotion	you	choose.)

2. Silently	say	to	yourself,	“I	am	sad.”

3. Fully	experience	what	it	is	like	to	say	and	feel	“I	am	sad.”	Stay	with
this	experience	until	you	feel	it	completely.

4. Now,	instead	of	saying,	“I	am	sad,”	take	a	breath	and	say,	“I	feel
sadness.”

5. Notice	the	shift	from	“I	am”	to	“I	feel.”	Experience	this	shift	and	the
new	feeling	of	being.	From	here,	feel	your	relationship	to	the
sadness	as	a	feeling.

6. Shift	again	by	saying,	“I	am	aware	of	feeling	sadness.”

7. Experience	awareness	of	feeling	sadness	fully.	Shift	into	an
observing	awareness.	Notice	the	different	emotional	quality	that
comes	from	this.

8. Shift	again,	and	silently	say	“Sadness	is	welcome.”

9. Starting	from	awareness,	experience	what	welcoming	the	feeling	is
like.

10. Feel	the	awareness-energy	embody	and	embrace	the	feeling.	Notice
the	different	emotional	quality	that	comes	from	welcoming.	Sense
the	support	that	welcoming	brings.

11. Finally,	say,	“Awareness	and	sadness	are	not	separate.”

Pause	to	feel	awake	awareness	around	and	within	you,	permeating	the
emotion	fully,	but	without	identifying	with	the	emotion	or	rejecting	it.	Feel
awareness-energy	with	emotion	fully	from	within.	Feel	the	awareness,	the
energetic	aliveness,	the	deep	stillness	of	presence.	Notice	the	feeling	of	looking
out	at	others	and	the	world	from	this	embodied,	connected,	open-hearted
awareness.	



PRACTICES	FOR	THE	FIFTH	FOUNDATION	OF	EFFORTLESS
MINDFULNESS

Open-Hearted	Awareness
From	our	experience	in	the	mindful	glimpses,	we	now	know	awake	awareness,
which	has	the	pristine	clarity	of	a	vast,	stunning	morning	sky.	Awareness-energy
then	 reveals	 the	 dynamic	 aliveness	 of	 interconnection.	 The	 Ground	 of	 Being
brings	 the	balance	of	 including	 the	 rest	of	 the	dark	night	 sky,	where	 there	 is	a
feeling	of	stillness	deeper	than	sleep,	yet	wide	awake—a	primordial	peace.	This
is	the	effortless	stability	we’ve	been	seeking.	As	the	Ground	of	Being	becomes
more	established,	the	dance	of	bliss	and	fabric	of	love	unfold	into	open-hearted
awareness	 from	 which	 we	 engage	 in	 compassionate	 and	 creative	 actions	 and
expression.

We	now	discover	heart-mind	and	the	nonconceptual	open-hearted	awareness
that	 is	 the	 important	 source	 of	 our	 new	 way	 of	 knowing.	 From	 open-hearted
awareness,	 we	 experience	 life	 from	 our	 heart	 and	 the	 field	 of	 love,	 which,
including	all	steps	before	it,	still	includes	spaciousness,	embodiment,	energy,	and
ground.	We	are	living	from	our	true	essence,	our	interconnected	Self,	and	we	are
directly	experiencing	and	being	with	the	content	within	and	around	us,	whatever
it	may	be.	We	are	settled	in	the	Ground	of	Being,	and	we	are	viewing	and	acting
in	the	world	and	in	our	everyday	lives	in	a	state	of	flow,	from	our	heart-mind.

From	open-hearted	awareness,	we	welcome	all	 thoughts	and	emotions,	and
we	 recognize	 the	 same	 awake	 awareness	 and	 heart-essence	 in	 others:	 we	 see
them	for	their	true	essence	and	thus	see	with	acceptance,	compassion,	gratitude,
and	love.	We	have	moved	from	witnessing	self	to	no-self	in	awake	awareness	to
“seeing	 from	 Being,”	 where	 we	 feel	 nothing	 is	 missing,	 and	 “I”—as	 open-
hearted	awareness—cannot	be	harmed.	We	are	aware	of	our	emotions,	patterns
of	 ego-identification,	 and	 our	 subpersonalities	 arising	 within	 us,	 yet	 we	 don’t
become	identified.	This	ability	to	remain	connected	to	everything	gives	us	more
space	 and	 wisdom,	 more	 capacity	 to	 choose	 how	 to	 respond	 when	 emotions,
opinions,	 and	 thoughts	 arise.	 From	 the	 support	 of	 open-hearted	 awareness,	we
can	begin	to	detox	repressed	emotions	and	rewire	our	brain	to	live	from	the	new
operating	 system.	 We	 can	 focus	 within	 or	 outside	 our	 body	 using	 local
awareness,	and	compassionate	activity	becomes	our	natural	expression.

GLIMPSE Drop	from	Head	to	Heart-Mind



This	is	moving	into	effortless	heart-mindfulness,	when	we	feel	like	we’ve
dropped	from	our	head	to	our	heart-mind.	It	feels	like	we	are	spacious	and
embodied	and	now	literally	operating	from	our	heart-mind.	But	the	heart-mind	is
not	our	emotional	heart;	it’s	not	our	physical	heart;	it’s	not	even	our	heart	chakra.
It’s	an	intelligence	that	is	called	bodhicitta	or	prajna	in	Sanskrit.	In	the	Christian
tradition,	it’s	the	oculus	cordis—the	eye	of	the	heart.

Take	a	few	minutes	now	and	glimpse	open-hearted	awareness	for	yourself.
Sit	comfortably,	eyes	open	or	closed,	and	simply	be	aware	of	all	your	senses.
Notice	the	activity	of	thinking	in	your	head.

1. First,	unhook	local	awareness	from	thoughts	in	your	head.	Next,	let
local	awareness	move	down	through	your	neck	and	into	your	chest,
and	then	know—directly—from	within	your	upper	body.

2. Become	familiar	with	this	direct	knowing,	which	is	neither	looking
down	from	your	head	nor	going	back	up	to	your	thoughts.

3. Feel	the	awareness	and	aliveness	together:	rest	without	going	to
sleep	and	stay	aware	without	going	to	thought	to	know.

4. Feel	that	awareness	can	know	both	the	awareness	and	aliveness
from	within	your	body.

5. Notice	your	heart-mind,	a	feeling	of	open-hearted	awareness	from
within	the	space	in	the	center	of	your	chest.

6. Feel	as	if	you	have	relocated	from	your	head	to	the	space	of	your
heart-mind,	which	you	are	now	aware	from.

7. Notice	that	you	can	invite	and	welcome	any	thoughts	and	emotions
into	your	heart	space,	so	you	can	remain	at	home	in	your	heart-mind
and	have	information	from	the	office	of	your	head	come	to	you	as	if
by	Wi-Fi.

8. Be	here,	receive	light	with	your	eyes,	and	look	out	from	the	eyes	of
open-hearted	awareness.	



GLIMPSE “Om	Sweet	Home”	in	Your	Heart

Here	is	a	mindful	glimpse	that	begins	with	making	a	sound	and	then	feeling	the
vibration	in	the	middle	of	your	chest.	This	can	be	a	helpful	way	to	invite
awareness	to	unhook	from	thinking	and	know	the	aliveness	and	awareness
directly	by	using	sound	and	vibration	as	support.

1. Place	your	hand	on	the	middle	of	your	chest.	Feel	your	chest
expanding	under	your	hand	as	your	breath	comes	in	and	relaxing	as
your	breath	goes	out.	Sing,	tone,	or	chant	“om,”	“amen,”	“home,”	or
“shalom”—or	just	“hmm.”	Focus	on	the	feeling	of	the	vibration	in
the	center	of	your	chest.

2. Unhook	local	awareness	from	your	thoughts	and	allow	it	to	be
drawn	down	to	the	vibration	and	awareness	in	the	center	of	your
chest.	Feel	as	if	your	heart-mind	is	the	new	home	of	knowing	from
awake	awareness.

3. Without	using	thought,	become	aware	of	the	stillness,	vibration,	and
awareness	that	is	pervasive	within,	and	then	open	your	awareness
past	your	body’s	boundaries	to	mingle	with	the	support	of	spacious
awareness	all	around.

4. Allow	the	awareness	of	your	heart-mind	to	know	itself	and	then
open	to	connect	to	all	else	as	well.

5. Hang	out	and	marinate	in	this	continuous	field	of	aware,	loving
presence.

6. Know	from	this	open-hearted	awareness	without	going	back	to	your
head	to	know.	

GLIMPSE Knowing	from	Heart-Mind

The	Tibetan	Buddhist	Tonglen	practice	is	interesting	because	it’s	the	opposite	of
some	New	Age	practices	such	as	breathing	in	positive	energy	and	love	and
breathing	out	negative	energy	and	suffering.	Tonglen	practice	is	a	practice	of



giving	and	receiving	in	which	one	is	instructed	to	breathe	into	the	heart	the
suffering	of	others	with	the	wish	to	take	away	their	ignorance	and	pain.	Then
you	breathe	out	of	your	heart,	sending	good	feelings,	compassion,	and	happiness
to	particular	people	or	groups.

This	next	mindful	glimpse	is	what	I	call	a	“nondual	giving	and	receiving”
practice.	You	can	do	this	practice	by	yourself,	sending	compassionate	energy	to
someone	in	your	life,	or	you	can	do	this	sitting	across	from	a	friend.	It	is	the
same	as	the	traditional	relative-level	Tonglen	practice,	except	that	when	you
breathe	into	your	heart,	you	don’t	stop	at	taking	the	suffering	into	your	body.
Instead,	you	allow	it	to	continue	through	your	heart	space	to	the	support	of
awake	awareness	behind	your	heart.	Then	you	feel	the	support	of	awake
awareness-energy	coming	back	into	your	body.	Next,	you	feel	the	loving
awareness-energy	go	out	to	another	person	in	front	of	you	and	connect	to	the
awake	awareness	within	and	behind	that	person.	As	you	breathe	in,	you	feel	their
ignorance	and	suffering	coming	back	to	and	through	your	body	and	back	to	the
support	of	awake	awareness.	The	key	experience	could	be	summarized	this	way:
Awake	awareness	has	your	back.	We	can	learn	to	receive	and	give	from	here.

Take	a	few	minutes	to	glimpse	open-hearted	awareness	for	yourself.

1. Sit	comfortably,	eyes	open	or	closed,	and	simply	be	aware	of	all	your
senses.

2. Notice	the	activity	of	thinking	in	your	head.

3. Now	unhook	local	awareness	from	thoughts	in	your	head.	Next,	let
local	awareness	move	down	through	your	neck	and	into	your	chest,
and	know	directly	from	within	your	upper	body.

4. Become	familiar	with	this	direct	knowing	from	within;	it	neither
looks	down	from	your	head	nor	looks	back	up	to	your	thoughts.

5. Feel	the	awareness	and	aliveness	together:	rest	without	going	to
sleep	and	stay	aware	without	going	to	thought	to	know.

6. Notice	a	feeling	of	an	open	heart	space	from	within	the	center	of
your	chest.



7. Feel	as	if	you	have	relocated	from	your	head	to	this	open	heart
space,	from	which	you	are	now	knowing	and	aware.

8. Notice	that	you	can	invite	and	welcome	any	thoughts	down	so	that
you	can	remain	at	home	in	your	heart	and	still	have	information
from	the	office	of	your	head	come	to	you	as	if	by	Wi-Fi.

9. Be	here,	receive	light	with	your	eyes,	and	look	out	from	the	eyes	of
open-hearted	awareness.

10. Feel	how	local	awareness	can	move	back,	through	the	door	of	your
heart,	to	the	space	behind	your	body.

11. Surrender	local	awareness	behind	your	body	until	local	awareness
mingles	with	spacious	awareness	that’s	already	aware.

12. Wait	until	you	are	knowing	from	the	timeless,	spacious,	thought-free
awareness.

13. Now	notice	that	this	field	of	awareness-energy	is	also	including	your
whole	body.

14. Notice	how	local	awareness	is	also	moving	forward	and	looking	out
at	the	world	through	your	heart	space.

15. Be	aware	from	this	field	of	awareness-energy—behind,	within	and	in
front.	It’s	simultaneously	spacious	and	pervasive:	a	continuous	field
of	interconnected	awareness-energy.

16. Notice	that	awareness-energy	is	both	outside	and	inside	at	the	same
time.

17. Without	going	to	thought	ask,	What	does	open-hearted	awareness
know?

18. Simply	let	go	and	let	be.	Rest	in	this	new	knowing	and	flowing;	see
from	being.



19. Notice	the	loving	awareness	happening	effortlessly.	

GLIMPSE Cave	of	the	Heart

This	practice	is	similar	to	the	yogic	meditation	practice	called	nirvikalpa
samadhi,	a	practice	of	absorption	without	any	self-referencing,	and	what
Tibetans	call	the	practice	of	“the	mind	of	black	near-attainment.”	It’s	also	similar
to	yoga	nidra	(yogic	sleep),	a	practice	of	deep	rest.	You	may	know	the	yoga
nidra	practice	shavasana,	commonly	done	at	the	end	of	yoga	classes,	which	has
great	benefits	for	resting	the	entire	nervous	system	on	a	deep	level.

Cave	of	the	Heart	is	a	practice	in	which	you	can	experience	no-self	in	a	way
that’s	more	restful	than	sleep,	yet	you	remain	wide	awake	without	content	or	a
small	self.	Many	of	the	glimpses	shift	us	into	a	pristine,	infinite	day-sky	view.	In
the	Cave	of	the	Heart	practice,	the	experience	of	no-self	is	like	the	infinite	night
sky,	an	experience	of	black-velvet	awareness.

The	twentieth-century	Hindu	sage	Ramana	Maharshi	often	recommended
two	practices.	One	was	the	classical	self-inquiry	“Who	Am	I?”	The	second
practice	he	recommended,	which	is	less	well	known,	he	referred	to	as	“resting	in
the	cave	of	the	heart	on	the	right	side	of	the	chest.”	He	never	described	in	much
detail	how	to	do	this	practice,	but	I	played	around	with	it	to	see	what	it	felt	like.	I
found	that	in	using	local	awareness	to	go	within	the	cave	of	the	heart,	it	seemed
to	open	up	a	profound	dimension	of	awareness.	Here’s	a	version	that	makes
sense	to	me	and	that	seems	to	work	for	many	others.	Many	of	my	students	say
this	is	one	of	their	favorite	practices.

On	the	left	side	of	your	chest	is	your	biological	heart.	The	heart	chakra—or
energy	center—has	been	described	as	being	in	the	middle	of	the	chest.	On	the
right	side	of	the	chest	is	the	cave	of	the	heart—the	safe	space	of	the	heart.	It’s
where	the	physical	heart	would	be	if	it	were	on	the	right	side	of	your	chest—but
instead,	there	is	a	space.

In	this	mindful	glimpse,	we	unhook	local	awareness	from	thought	and	drop	it
down	to	the	safe,	restful	place	that	is	the	cave	of	the	heart.	As	I	mentioned,	it’s	a
way	of	resting	deeper	than	sleep,	though	we	are	wide	awake.	When	our	body
rests	deeply,	the	normal	tendency	is	for	our	mind	to	fall	asleep.	Here,	when	you
allow	your	body	and	brain	to	rest	deeply,	see	if	there’s	also	an	awareness	that
remains	wide	awake—a	black-velvet	purity,	like	the	night	sky.

Some	people	report	that	a	short	period	of	resting	in	the	cave	of	the	heart



makes	them	feel	like	they’ve	had	the	equivalent	of	the	best	full-night’s	sleep	of
their	life.	Enjoy.

1. Sit	comfortably	or	lie	on	your	back.	Close	your	eyes	and	take	a	full
breath	or	two	so	that	you	feel	alert,	alive,	and	awake.

2. Now	allow	local	awareness	to	unhook	from	thought.	Let	it	slowly
drift	down	like	a	leaf	below	your	neck	and	find	a	safe,	restful	place
inside	your	upper	body	on	the	right	side	of	your	chest.	This	safe
space	may	feel	like	it	has	a	little	light	or	pinpoints	of	light,	or	it	may
be	completely	dark,	like	black	velvet.

3. Allow	your	awareness	to	rest	in	this	black-velvet	silence	without
falling	asleep.	Feel	each	cell	drinking	in	this	rest	and	renewal.	Let
awake	awareness	surrender	into	the	cave	of	the	heart	and	rest	as	this
deep,	dazzling	darkness,	deeper	than	sleep,	yet	wide	awake.	Remain
here	for	ten	to	fifteen	minutes	or	until	you	naturally	arise	or	open
your	eyes.	

I	hope	these	mindful	glimpses	have	opened	you	to	new	forms	of	awareness
and	shifts	in	perception.	The	more	you	practice	them,	the	more	you	will	learn	to
abide	 as	 your	 true	Self.	Give	 yourself	 patience	 and	 gentleness,	 and	make	 sure
you	bring	a	sense	of	curiosity	 to	 it	and	enjoy	 it!	You	can	use	 this	chapter	as	a
reference	 anytime	 in	 your	 day-to-day	 life.	 You	 can	 explore	 and	 choose	 your
favorites.	Don’t	 forget	 that	 you	 can	make	 your	 own	 voice	 recordings	 of	 these
mindful	glimpses	to	listen	to	at	your	own	pacing.



Part	III
Abiding



M

7

The	Ultimate	Medicine	of	No-self	Self

any	people	have	longed	and	strived	to	know	their	true	Self.	One
reason	we	can’t	find	Self,	see	it,	or	understand	it	 is	because	Self	 is	not	an	“it.”
Self	is	not	an	object	or	thing	that	can	be	seen,	heard,	touched,	smelled,	tasted,	or
known	 by	 thought.	 It	 isn’t	 an	 emotion,	 image,	 belief,	 feeling,	 or	 even	 energy.
This	is	why	some	traditions	begin	by	emphasizing	that	there	is	no	solid,	separate
self.	By	using	 the	 term	“no-self	Self”	or	 just	 “Self,”	 I	 am	bridging	 the	no-self
insight	with	our	vast	open-hearted	awareness	and	the	conventional,	human	level
of	 reality.	 So	 far	 in	 this	 book,	 we’ve	 mostly	 been	 practicing	 shifting	 out	 of
thinking	 mind	 and	 exploring	 different	 forms	 of	 awareness,	 and	 now	 we’ll
transition	to	understanding	who	we	are:	our	identity.	We’ll	do	this	by	shifting	out
of	our	small	self	and	 into	no-self	and	 then	uncovering	our	 true	Self,	which	I’ll
refer	to	as	capital-S	Self.

When	we	discover	open-hearted	awareness,	we	realize	 that	our	small	sense
of	self	is	not	truly	who	we	are.	When	we	look	closely	here,	we	see	there	is	not
one	small	self,	but	 there	 is	not	 just	an	absence	of	self	either,	as	we	have	many
parts	of	our	personality.

Once	 we	 have	 shifted	 our	 identity	 from	 a	 small	 self	 to	 experiencing	 the
spaciousness	of	no-self	through	awake	awareness,	we	are	free	as	we	realize	that
our	 small	 sense	 of	 self	 is	 not	 truly	who	we	 are.	However,	 as	we	 look	 back	 at
where	 our	 small	 self	 was	 located	 from	 awareness-energy,	 we	 have	 the	 funny
experience	 of	 realizing	 that	 even	 though	 there	 isn’t	 one	 small	 self,	 there	 are
multiple	 subpersonalities	within	us.	We	see	our	own	 thoughts	and	emotions	as
constellations	of	consciousness,	or	subpersonalities,	which	I	will	call	parts	of	us.
In	 the	 practice	 of	 insight	meditation,	we	 break	 down	 our	 small	 self	 into	 even
smaller	elements	of	thoughts,	feelings,	and	sensations.	However,	while	engaging
in	daily	life,	these	thoughts,	feelings,	and	sensations	come	together	and	manifest



as	parts,	 so	 it	 is	 helpful	 to	 learn	how	 to	 address	 this	 level.	This	 is	 the	process
we’ll	be	covering	in	this	chapter.

I’ve	asked	clients	to	become	aware	of	an	anxious	part	and	then	a	less	anxious
part	 of	 themselves.	When	 asked	 who	 is	 aware	 of	 those	 two	 parts,	 they	 often
respond,	 “Me.”	 I	 have	 then	 asked,	 “Where	 are	 you	 aware	 from?”	 They	 have
responded,	 “All	 around,”	 or	 “Within	my	 heart,”	 or	 “From	 everywhere.”	 I	was
amazed	 at	 how	 even	 people	who	 had	 diagnosed	mental	 illnesses	 and	 complex
trauma	benefitted	from	directly	accessing	Self.	I	started	to	adapt	and	refine	this
process	 of	 realizing	 Self	 and	 brought	 the	 two	 disciplines	 of	 meditation	 and
psychology	 together	 in	my	 psychotherapy	 practice	 and	 teaching.	 I	 have	 found
that	distinguishing	small	self	from	Self	is	accessible	and	relatable	for	clients	and
students	when	it	comes	to	understanding	how	awakening,	psychological	growth,
and	healing	overlap.

The	Experience	of	Self
The	 Self	 has	 been	 the	 most	 valued	 human	 dimension	 in	 most	 cultures	 and
contemplative	 traditions	 throughout	 history.	 Our	 interconnected	 Self	 has	 been
called	being,	true	nature,	nature	of	mind,	sacred	heart,	unity	consciousness,	no-
self	Self,	unchanging	essence,	open-hearted	awareness,	and	optimal	mind.	Self
has	 often	 been	 associated	 with	 religious	 traditions	 and	 considered	 spiritual.
However,	Self	can	simply	be	understood	as	 the	 subtlest	essential	dimension	of
the	human	consciousness	we	all	share,	regardless	of	belief.

Self	is	you,	but	not	the	“you”	that	you	often	think	you	are.	Self	is	the	“I	am”
without	 I	 am	 “this”	 or	 I	 am	 “that.”	 Self	 is	 not	 the	 thinker.	 Self	 is	 not	 your
personality,	not	your	ego	or	observing	ego,	not	a	hypnotic	or	altered	state,	not	an
image	or	your	 imagination,	not	an	archetype	or	a	 separate	 soul,	not	a	guide	or
inner	voice,	not	solely	an	energy,	not	an	entity	or	the	human	person	that	you	are
today.	Self	is	neither	meditator	nor	detached	mindful	witness.	Self	is	aware	of	all
these	 experiences,	 states,	 and	 parts;	 Self	 is	 inherent	 within	 them	 and	 includes
them.

Self	 is	 not	 created,	 developed,	 or	 conditioned.	Self	 is.	Everyone	 is	 already
Self.	Self	is	within	us,	around	us,	and	is	us:	it	is	who	we	truly	are.	Self	is	closer
than	 our	 breath,	 and	 Self,	 like	 breath,	 happens	 automatically,	 spontaneously,
without	any	effort.	Self	feels	“centered”	but	not	centered	in	our	head	or	a	distinct
part.	Many	people	say	it	feels	like	a	“centerless	center,”	which	is	both	embodied
and	 free.	 Self	 is	 essentially	 the	 same	within	 each	 of	 us,	 and	 each	 person	 is	 a



unique	expression	of	Self.
Self	 is	 inherent	within	us	even	when	 the	“clouds”	of	our	beliefs,	emotions,

feelings,	perceptions,	and	identifications	obscure	it.	Self	loves	and	can	safeguard
all	parts.	Self	is	also	within	all	parts.	Self	can	know	parts	just	as	parts	can	learn
to	know	Self.

Self	is	our	natural	context,	which	is	always	present,	but	can	become	hidden
when	 blended	with	 our	 parts.	Discovering	 the	 fullness	 of	 Self	 is	 described	 by
many	people	as	“returning	home.”	Losing	a	sense	of	Self	is	often	the	feeling	of
being	contracted	into	a	point	of	view,	blended	with	a	part	that	sits	in	the	seat	of
“I,”	so	the	part	believes	it	is	“me.”

Although	Self	is	who	we	have	always	been	and	includes	the	loving	presence
we	have	been	looking	for,	parts	may	initially	protect	against	feeling	Self	because
it	 is	so	boundless.	But	parts	 long	for	Self,	and	 they	all	are	ultimately	happy	 to
unburden	 and	 have	 Self	 lead.	 For	 example,	 people	 who	 identify	 with	 feeling
inadequate	 and	 experience	 shame	 may	 truly	 believe	 that	 there	 is	 something
wrong	with	 them.	There	 is	a	way	to	step	outside	of	 the	part	 that	has	 that	fixed
belief,	 view	 it	 from	 the	 outside,	 and	 interact	 with	 it.	 Accessing	 Self,	 and
welcoming	all	parts,	has	been	called	“the	ultimate	medicine”	because	it	relieves
the	 root	 of	 suffering,	 which	 is,	 paradoxically,	 caused	 by	 not	 experiencing	 or
living	from	the	Self	that	we	are.

Self	 is	 innate	 and	 whole	 and	 has	 different	 dimensions.	 Self	 appears	 as
different	 expressions	 of	 itself—like	 water	 when	 it	 is	 ice,	 liquid,	 steam,	 or
invisible	humidity.	All	dimensions	of	Self	 are	always	here;	however,	when	we
are	blended	with	a	part,	we	are	neither	aware	of	Self	nor	aware	from	Self.	When
this	happens,	we	are	only	aware	of	our	part	from	our	part,	and	we	think	that	the
part	is	all	there	is.	Our	world	then	becomes	much	smaller.	We	can	even	subscribe
to	our	part’s	worldview	that	we	are	“not	good	enough”	and	subtly	give	up	in	one
area	of	life.

This	brings	us	back	to	how	Self	can	be	distinguished	from	a	part	through	the
process	of	unblending.	Unblending	is	a	process	of	disidentifying	with	parts	and
identifying	with	Self,	our	magnificent	essence.	When	we	are	blended,	not	only
do	we	believe	we	are	that	dominant	part,	but	that	part	believes	it	is	us.	We’ll	play
with	 unblending	 in	 the	 mindful	 glimpse	 at	 the	 end	 of	 this	 chapter,	 but	 first
consider	how	unblending	begins:	by	helping	parts	trust	that	it	is	safe	for	them	to
relax.	We	can	unblend	by	asking	the	part	for	more	space	between	Self	and	that
part.	 As	 we	 do	 this,	 it	 is	 important	 to	 show	 respect	 to	 the	 blended	 parts;
otherwise,	they	will	double	down	in	strength,	feeling	unseen,	and	try	even	harder



to	 receive	acknowledgment.	For	 example,	 if	we	 judge	our	 judging	part,	 it	will
get	stronger	and	more	protective.	It	seems	illogical	to	welcome	and	give	love	to
angry	or	mean	parts	of	us,	but	this	is	what	seems	to	be	the	secret	to	liberating	us.

We	will	 know	we’ve	 shifted	 from	parts	 to	Self	when	our	 perspective	 goes
from	 feeling	 located	 in	 a	 contracted	 place,	 looking	 out	 from	 a	 point	 of	 view
inside	 the	 body	 (usually	 from	behind	 the	 eyes),	 to	 viewing	 from	open-hearted
awareness,	which	is	simultaneously	within,	boundless,	and	interconnected.

Self	can	sometimes	be	distinguished	by	asking,	Am	I	aware	from	my	head	or
from	my	heart?	or	In	this	Self-to-part	relationship,	how	open	is	my	heart	toward
that	part?	The	heart-knowing	from	Self	is	not	just	from	what	you	might	think	of
as	 your	 physical	 heart,	 heart	 chakra,	 or	 emotional	 heart,	 but	 rather	 from	 your
natural,	wise	heart-mind.	This	always	already	open-hearted	awareness	is	waiting
patiently	to	be	uncovered	and	lived	from.

Self	is	what	is	here	when	everything	else	falls	away.	Self	doesn’t	try	to	exist.
Self	 is	 beyond	 the	qualities,	 states,	 beliefs,	 emotions,	 expressions,	 or	 identities
that	we	cycle	 through.	Self	 is	 the	constant.	For	many	people,	Self	 first	 reveals
itself	 in	 silence,	when	 the	noise	 falls	 away.	Self	 is	 extraordinarily	 simple.	Self
has	no	agenda,	no	striving,	no	grasping,	no	aversion.	It	needs	nothing	because	it
is	and	has	everything.	Self	is	the	foundation	before	the	identity	we	wear,	like	the
nakedness	 before	 the	 clothing	 that	 we	 put	 on.	We	 often	 think	 the	 clothing	 is
“me,”	but	Self	is	the	naked	awareness	under	this	“me.”	When	we	talk	about	“ego
personality	 self,”	 we’re	 talking	 about	 the	 clothing	 or	 each	 of	 the	 articles	 of
clothing,	 because	 there	 are	 often	 many	 component	 parts!	 As	 we	 come	 to
experience	life	increasingly	from	our	interconnected	Self,	we	notice	the	parts	of
us	that	come	and	go.	We	can	observe,	get	to	know,	and	care	for	these	parts.

More	than	the	Sum	of	the	Parts
When	 I	 returned	 from	my	 fellowship	 in	 Sri	 Lanka,	 India,	 and	Nepal,	 I	 began
practicing	 a	 form	 of	 mindfulness-based	 psychotherapy	 that	 I	 called	 Effortless
Mindfulness	Based	Therapy	(EMBT).	This	was	a	unique	mindfulness	approach
that	was	not	based	 in	cognitive	 therapy	but	 instead	 in	body	and	subpersonality
psychotherapies,	such	as	Jungian,	Gestalt,	and	Psychosynthesis.	In	recent	years,
I’ve	 been	 collaborating	with	Richard	 Schwartz,	 the	 founding	 developer	 of	 the
Internal	Family	Systems	(IFS)	model	of	psychotherapy.	We	have	had	long	talks
and	 discovered	we	were	 each	 using	 similar	 systems	 of	Self	 and	 parts.	He	 had
come	up	with	a	simple	and	clear	way	of	accessing	and	defining	parts,	and	I	had



focused	on	developing	a	simple	and	clear	way	of	accessing	and	defining	Self.	As
a	result,	I	have	adopted	his	elegant	and	thorough	map	of	parts	when	I	work	with
clients.	What	we	teach	complements	each	other,	and	we	have	taught	a	number	of
workshops	and	retreats	together.

The	IFS	model	describes	the	nature	of	the	human	psyche	as	organizing	into
subpersonalities,	or	parts,	that	all	come	together	within	the	Self.	The	goal	of	this
therapy	is	not	to	judge,	minimize,	or	get	rid	of	these	parts,	but	instead	to	notice
and	lovingly	embrace	all	of	our	parts	from	our	interconnected	Self,	which	is	also
within	all	parts.

Both	models	of	psychotherapy—EMBT	and	 IFS—present	paths	 toward	 the
relief	of	suffering	and	becoming	more	whole	and	authentic.	The	centerpiece	of
each	is	our	“capital-S”	Self	because	only	a	limited	level	of	psychological	healing
and	 growth	 can	 happen	 without	 realizing	 Self.	What’s	 more,	 this	 approach	 is
empowering	because	it	shows	us	that	it	is	our	own	true	Self—rather	than	another
person	 or	 external	 teachings—that	 actively	 provides	 the	 deepest	 and	 most
complete	healing.

Schwartz	 clearly	 explains	 how	what	we	 often	 call	 the	 ego	 personality,	 the
psyche,	or	the	small	self	is	a	composition	of	parts	or	subpersonalities	that	take	on
certain	roles	and	interact	with	each	other.	For	example,	we	may	experience	a	part
of	ourselves	that	feels	anger	and	then	another	part	of	ourselves	that	feels	shame
about	the	anger	and	then	another	part	of	ourselves	that	tries	to	manage	what	we
should	do	about	that	anger	and	shame.	In	this	way,	our	thoughts	and	beliefs	can
be	 experienced	 as	 little	 personalities	 within	 us	 that	 behave	 according	 to	 their
own	worldview.	 It’s	 the	 natural	 state	 of	 the	mind	 to	 be	multiple.	 Events	 from
childhood	 burden	 parts,	 force	 them	 into	 extreme	 roles,	 and	 make	 them	 feel
disconnected	from	Self.

For	example,	many	of	us	have	had	early	shame-based	thoughts	that	are	about
trying	 to	 understand	 who	 we	 are,	 such	 as,	 “I’m	 not	 good	 enough,”	 or	 “I’m
unlovable.”	 These	 are	 the	mistaken	 views	 that	 are	 the	 burdens	 carried	 by	 our
parts.	When	these	burdened	parts	 take	over,	our	view	of	life	 is	 limited	by	their
perspective.	As	we	get	 to	know	our	parts,	even	the	most	difficult	ones,	we	can
discover	the	insight	of	IFS	therapy	that	all	parts	are	looking	for	love,	and	there
are	no	bad	parts.

I’ve	combined	Schwartz’s	 insights	with	my	method	of	experiential	ways	of
accessing	Self—the	whole	of	who	we	truly	are	beyond	any	part—as	a	technique
for	 embodying	 and	 living	 an	 awakened	 life.	 I	 particularly	 find	 this	 the	 most
effective	way	of	healing	our	shadows—those	unconscious,	repressed,	or	denied



parts.	 This	 approach	 helps	 to	 create	 a	 positive	 feedback	 loop	 for	 awakening:
First,	our	practice	of	effortless	mindfulness	helps	us	access	our	greater	context	of
true	Self,	 through	which	we	 can	work	with	 our	 parts.	 In	 turn,	 doing	 our	 parts
work	heals	and	unburdens	us	on	a	psychological	level	so	that	we	can	more	easily
uncover	and	maintain	the	wholeness,	coherence,	and	peace	of	our	true	Self	that
can	 allow	 for	 sustained	 awakening.	 Learning	 effortless	 mindfulness	 as	 a
foundation	 can	 change	what	would	 have	 been	 a	 “dark	 night	 of	 the	 soul”	 into
more	 of	 a	 detox	 or	 thawing-out	 process,	 with	 more	 growing	 pains	 than
unconscious	 suffering.	 The	 way	 of	 effortless	 mindfulness	 gives	 access	 to	 the
resource	of	Self,	which	can	bear	what	seemed	to	be	unbearable.

Knowing	and	Liberating	Parts
The	clouds	that	obscure	our	already	awake	loving	nature	often	take	the	form	of
hurt	 parts	 of	 us	 that	 are	 all	 trying	 to	 find	 safety	 and	 love.	 Our	 parts	 fit	 into
distinct	categories,	each	with	different	reasons	for	being.	In	the	IFS	model,	our
parts	are	categorized	as:

• Managers	(These	protector	parts	try	to	protect	through	different	daily
roles.)

• Exiles	(These	are	the	hurt	parts,	which	are	often	repressed,	usually	storing
trauma.)

• Firefighters	(These	are	the	parts	that	emerge	in	crisis	and	act	strongly
when	exiles	are	upset.)

We	experience	our	subpersonalities	when	we	say	things	like,	“One	part	of	me
is	angry	at	my	partner,	but	another	part	understands	why	they	said	that.”	Or	we
might	 discover	 in	 psychotherapy	 how	 a	 young	 part	 of	 us	 was	 burdened.	 For
example,	someone	dealing	with	low	self-esteem	might	remember	something	like
this:	“When	I	was	a	child,	my	mother	took	a	long	time	to	come	and	feed	me.	I
felt	 the	pain	of	hunger	and	grew	terrified	 that	 I	had	been	abandoned.	On	some
level,	I	started	to	believe	that	there	must	be	something	wrong	with	me:	I	must	be
worthless	 or	 unlovable.”	 The	 burdens	 of	 exiles,	 managers,	 and	 firefighters
emerge	organically	for	everyone,	regardless	of	the	type	or	style	of	parenting	we
experienced.	IFS	and	EMBT	are	ways	of	doing	shadow	work	with	parts	that	are



hidden,	denied,	or	repressed,	such	as	exiles	and	firefighters,	to	effectively	bring
such	unconscious	parts	into	the	conscious	light	of	healing.

These	patterns	create	neuronal	networks	in	the	brain	that	are	like	scenes	from
a	movie	that	keep	replaying.	When	these	networks	are	activated	and	reactivated
in	the	brain,	nervous	system,	and	body	through	a	triggering	event,	they	overtake
us	 with	 primal	 force.	 This	 can	 cause	 us	 to	 regress,	 making	 us	 think	 or	 even
behave	as	if	we’re	the	age	when	the	trauma	originally	occurred.	It	can	feel	like
we	are	that	hurt	child	looking	through	our	adult	eyes.	We	may	feel	overtaken	by
a	damaged	worldview	or	by	strong	feelings	and	motivations,	such	as	protective,
defensive	rage.

A	 triggering	 event	 is	 an	 event	 in	 the	 present	 that	 is	 similar	 to	 a	 traumatic
event	in	the	past	that	was	too	overwhelming.	Even	though	the	experiences	may
have	been	real	when	they	happened,	they	are	not	happening	in	the	present.	Parts
are	not	“you”	now,	but	when	triggered,	they	feel	and	act	like	they	are	you.	If	they
are	treated	like	they	are	only	thoughts	or	feelings	arising,	they	may	seem	to	go
away	temporarily,	but	they	return.	Even	though	it	seems	counterintuitive,	talking
to	 these	 parts	 of	 us	 as	 if	 they	were	 the	 little	 beings	 they	 think	 they	 are	 is	 the
radical	shift	I	offer	in	this	healing	paradigm.	When	parts	can	be	loved	and	healed
back	 to	 their	 innocent	 childlike	 nature,	 they	 are	 liberated	 by	 your	whole	 Self.
When	 the	 inner	child	 is	 listened	 to,	 the	misunderstandings	unburdened,	and	 its
emotions	 felt	 by	 Self,	 parts	 frozen	 in	 time	 or	 stuck	 in	 an	 emotional	 loop	 can
become	integrated	elements	of	a	complete,	healthy	human.

Some	of	the	initial	work	that	needs	to	take	place	for	this	synthesis	to	occur
can	 be	 done	 prior	 to	 initial	 awakening	 through	 psychotherapy	 and	 other
personal-growth	 techniques.	 However,	 it	 is	 only	 possible	 to	 do	 this	 work	 of
waking	up	 and	 growing	up	 fully	 from	Self,	which	 is	why	practicing	 effortless
mindfulness	is	key.	It	provides	the	capacity	to	access	our	Self.	When	we’re	able
to	shift	our	identity	in	this	way,	we	have	more	capacity	and	deeper	love	to	care
for	our	parts.

Much	of	 this	healing	can	be	done	 in	our	daily	 lives,	but	 there	 is	also	great
benefit	to	having	someone,	such	as	a	therapist	or	experienced	meditation	teacher,
guide	 and	 support	 you	 through	 the	 introduction	 of	 parts	 to	 Self.	 This	 process
leads	 to	 the	moment	when	we	realize	 that	parts	exist,	why	they	arose,	and	 that
they	are	not	ultimately	 the	 true	Self.	 It	 is	 then	 that	we	can	distinguish	our	 true
Self	 from	 the	 parts.	 Often,	 the	 first	 step	 is	 experiencing	 our	 parts	 from	 our
mindful	 witness,	 which	 is	 a	 Self-like	 part.	 A	 Self-like	 part	 is	 a	 manager,	 a
spiritual	ego	 that	has	many	of	the	qualities	of	Self	but	still	has	the	agenda	of	a



part.	Gradually,	we	can	learn	to	access	Self	to	embrace	our	parts	with	love	and	to
integrate	 toward	deep	wholeness.	Eventually,	we	 can	 treat	 other	 people’s	 parts
with	 the	 same	 understanding	 we’ve	 given	 our	 own,	 so	 when	 we	 encounter
someone	 acting	 from	 a	 hurt	 or	manager	 part,	we	 realize	what’s	 occurring	 and
find	a	way	to	respond	with	empathy	rather	than	react	with	fear-based	judgment.

It’s	 important	 to	 notice	 how	 we	 might	 be	 in	 the	 habit	 of	 trying	 to	 find
solutions	 for	 our	 troubles	 by	 using	 tactics	 of	 our	 small	 mind	 and	 small	 self.
Often,	when	we	view	our	emotions	from	our	small	self,	we	view	some	emotions
as	“good”	and	some	as	“bad”	and	then	try	to	transform	destructive	emotions	into
constructive	emotions.	In	doing	so,	we	may	reinforce	the	manager	part	or	small
self	that	is	trying	to	heal	our	emotions.	However,	no	small	self,	managing	part,	or
ego	 identity	 can	 live	 a	 fully	 intimate,	 emotional	 life.	This	 attempt	will	 lead	 to
some	form	of	neurosis,	anxiety,	depression,	or	addiction.	Instead,	we	can	learn	to
access	our	original	Self,	which	has	the	natural	capacity	to	feel,	create,	and	love.

Some	parts	 react	 to	 this	by	 trying	 to	help,	by	becoming	smart	workaholics,
angry	managers,	 or	 protectors	 of	 the	 exiled	 inner	 children.	 For	 example,	 if	 an
inner	child	part	feels	needy,	an	angry	protector	part,	who	believes	that	neediness
will	 lead	 to	 rejection	 from	 others,	 may	 jump	 in,	 and	 in	 a	 faulty	 attempt	 at
protecting	may	self-blame,	telling	the	child	part	to	“stop	crying	and	get	a	grip!”
The	unique	beauty	of	the	IFS	approach	is	that	we	don’t	try	to	fight	our	protector
parts,	 get	 rid	 of	 them,	 replace	 them,	 or	 even	 transform	 these	 “negative”
managers	or	protectors	into	positive	feelings.	Instead,	like	the	exiled	child	parts,
these	manager	and	firefighter	parts	need	love	to	be	unburdened	and	release	the
role	 they	 feel	 they	 have	 to	 play.	This	 is	 done	when	 our	 true	Self	 understands,
respects,	and	appreciates	the	“difficult”	parts	and	thanks	them	for	trying	to	help
as	they	deemed	best.

I’ve	 learned	 from	my	own	experiences	and	 from	my	psychotherapy	clients
that	 it	 is	 best	 to	 meet	 each	 part	 in	 the	 way	 it	 appears.	 So	 rather	 than	 just
witnessing	 thoughts,	 feelings,	 stories,	 and	 beliefs,	 the	 most	 healing	 approach
seems	 to	 be	 listening	 to	 and	unburdening	 these	 parts	 by	 interacting	with	 them
with	love.	The	primary	way	is	to	have	a	therapist	lead	you	through	this	process
to	go	 inward	 and	 feel	 each	part	within	your	body	and	 locate	 their	 shape,	 size,
color,	and	emotional	tone.	Then	honor	and	thank	the	part,	and	ask	the	part	if	it
would	give	you	some	space.	Then,	from	the	space,	begin	to	feel	a	sense	of	true
Self,	which	 feels	 at	 first	 like	 open	 space.	This	 allows	 for	 some	detachment	 as
well	as	some	foundation	of	Self	in	awake	awareness	rather	than	another	thought-
based	part.	Then	our	Self	is	asked	directly,	“How	do	You	feel	toward	that	part?”



When	we	are	 in	Self,	we	feel	a	connection,	which	 is	called	Self-energy,	which
feels	compassion	toward	the	parts.

Psychological	Underpass
All	 our	 parts—whether	 hurt	 or	 protective,	 angry	 or	 defensive—work	 toward
making	everything	feel	okay.	It	is	important	not	to	minimize,	reject,	or	try	to	get
rid	 of	 our	 strong	 emotional	 parts.	 For	 example,	 if	we	 try	 to	meditate	 negative
feelings	 away,	 we	 end	 up	 in	 a	 “spiritual	 bypass”—only	 focusing	 on	 the
transcendent	 dimension,	 experiencing	ourselves	 as	 awake	 awareness	 but	 numb
and	distant	from	the	parts	of	us	that	are	still	unintegrated	and	not	meeting	them
the	way	they	need	to	be	met.

When	identity	remains	in	“I	think,	therefore	I	am,”	and	we	try	to	deal	with
our	parts	by	intellectualizing	or	rationalizing	them	away,	I	call	this	a	“cognitive
overpass.”	We	can’t	transcend	our	hurt	exiles,	our	protective	parts,	our	emotional
trauma,	 or	 our	 full	 relational	 humanity.	 If	 we	 have	 a	 psychology	 that	 doesn’t
have	this	larger	dimension	of	Self,	we	can	end	up	in	what	I	call	a	psychological
underpass—reducing	our	primary	 identity	 and	 tools	of	healing	 to	biology,	 ego
managers,	emotions,	cognition,	and	personality,	trying	to	tend	to	our	parts	from	a
helpful	manager	part	that	can	be	skilled	but	is	not	our	true	Self.	This	is	why	it	is
so	important	to	practice	effortless	mindfulness:	so	that	we	can	get	to	know	and
act	from	our	true	Self.

We	 can	 go	 deeper	 into	 exploring	 our	ways	 of	 attempting	 to	 help	 from	 the
small	self.	Returning	to	the	spiritual	bypass,	consider	that	we	might	alternatively
find	ourselves	going	 to	 a	no-self	detached	witness	 that	 is	 ignoring	 some	parts,
which	doesn’t	resolve	anything	in	the	long	term.	For	example,	if	you	feel	jealous
or	 angry,	 and	 you	 treat	 those	 feelings	 as	 destructive	 emotions	 and	 then	 use
deliberate	mindfulness	to	see	them	in	a	neutral	way	or	try	to	transform	them	with
a	managing	part	or	positive	antidotes	of	 lovingkindness,	 they	may	diminish	or
seem	 to	 go	 away,	 but	 the	 jealous	 or	 angry	 part	 that	 was	 not	 wanted	 is	 still
somewhere	 within	 your	 consciousness	 feeling	 unwanted	 and	 dismissed.	 This
jealous	 or	 angry	 part	 takes	 its	 burdens	 and	 feelings	 and	 goes	 back	 into	 the
shadows	until	it	is	triggered	again.

The	 cognitive	 overpass	 is	 trickier.	 Here,	 our	 rational	 manager	 or	 mindful
witness	will	show	up	within	us	to	acknowledge	that	we	are	caught	in	some	kind
of	 suffering.	 The	 rational	 manager	 and	 mindful	 witness	 are	 more	 developed
parts,	but	they	are	still	just	parts,	so	we	remain	limited	in	the	parts-based	small-



self	system.
When	 you	 confuse	 your	 true	 identity	 with	 a	 part	 of	 you	 that	 is	 caught	 in

ignorance	 or	 attachment—a	 psychological	 underpass—it	 is	 not	 just	 that	 you
believe	you	are	an	angry	part;	more	importantly,	the	angry	part	believes	it	is	you
and	becomes	you	and	acts	and	reacts	like	it	is	you.	While	being	identified	as	the
part,	we	address	 the	emotion,	 trying	 to	be	 less	angry,	more	accepting,	or	more
vulnerable.	We	can	only	get	so	far	 in	healing	without	discovering	 the	Self	 that
has	natural	vulnerability	and	courage.

The	 spiritual	 bypass,	 cognitive	 overpass,	 and	 psychological	 underpass	 are
attempts	to	heal	parts	from	other	parts!	This	doesn’t	work.	We	can’t	experience
full	integration	because	our	parts	do	not	have	the	capacity	of	healing	love.	Only
our	true	Self	is	bigger	than	and	beyond	all	of	our	conditioning.	So	the	important
thing	 is	 to	 find	 the	 Self	 that	 has	 the	 capacity	 to	 bear	 what	 seemed	 to	 be
unbearable,	the	Self	that	can	be	with	these	parts	and	love	them.

Sometimes,	 though,	 it’s	hard	 to	 tell	 if	we’re	meeting	parts	 from	a	Self-like
part,	 especially	when	we	make	 a	 cognitive	 overpass	when	we	 are	 not	 used	 to
experiencing	 ourselves	 outside	 of	 the	 small	 mind.	 It	 is	 common	 to	 want	 to
escape	 the	 small	mind—and	 everything	 else—so	 badly	 that	 we	 end	 up	 in	 the
spiritual	bypass!	The	key	is	to	be	gentle	with	ourselves	and	with	all	of	our	parts,
including	the	parts	of	us	that	are	worried	if	we’re	doing	this	work	incorrectly	or
judging	ourselves	for	“not	getting	it.”

When	 you	 check	 to	 see	 where	 Self	 is,	 who	 is	 looking?	 Only	 the
interconnected	Self	all	around	and	within	all	parts	can	know	itself.	Self	is	not	a
state	 that	appears	 to	you.	This	 is	because	Self	 is	you!	As	a	way	of	unblending
your	Self	from	Self-like	parts,	you	can	ask,	Is	this	part	aware	of	me?	which	will
shift	you	to	locate	your	Self	beyond	the	part,	creating	an	amazing	opportunity	to
know	Self	directly	from	the	Self.

The	Three	Facets	of	Self
Just	as	it	is	possible	to	distinguish	and	know	our	parts	as	managers,	exiles,	and
firefighters,	 we	 can	 learn	 to	 know	 three	 aspects	 of	 Self.	 Richard	 Schwartz
divides	Self	into	“Self-energy”	and	“Self-leadership,”	to	which	I’ve	added	“Self-
essence.”	These	can	be	described	briefly	as	follows:

• Self-essence	is	the	way	we	experience	Self	with	awake	awareness—pure
Self,	the	authentic	fundamental	nature	of	who	we	are:	invisible,



intelligent	awake	awareness.

• Self-energy	is	our	Self	knowing	parts	and	other	people	and	experiencing
from	awareness-energy	through	being	relational	and	connected.

• Self-leadership	is	grounded	in	Self-essence	and	Self-energy	becoming
full	embodiment	of	open-hearted	awareness,	where	we	can	live	our	daily
life	from.

Notice	that	each	aspect	of	Self	has	a	quality	we	have	covered	through	the	lens	of
awareness.	 Now	 we’re	 looking	 at	 how	 we	 can	 experience	 our	 felt	 sense	 of
identity,	who	we	are,	in	congruence	with	these	types	of	awareness.

FACET	ONE SELF-ESSENCE

As	 we’ve	 explored	 in	 these	 pages,	 awake	 awareness	 is	 intelligence	 prior	 to
thought	 that	 is	 invisible	yet	palpable.	Self-essence	 is	not	 found	as	either	 inside
versus	outside	but	is	both	spacious	and	pervasive,	transcendent	and	immanent—
everywhere,	nowhere	in	particular,	and	very	much	here.	Because	it	is	wordless,
and	 not	 a	 thing	 or	 an	 object,	 we	 might	 overlook	 it.	 Self-essence—invisible
intelligent	awareness—is	our	boundless	ground.

In	my	process	of	understanding	and	teaching	Self-essence,	I’ve	come	up	with
eleven	Is	to	illustrate	it:

Invisible Intelligent Innate

Is Indestructible Infinite

Immediate Illumined Inherent

Inspired Ineffable 	

Self-essence	does	not	change	or	grow,	 it	 just	 is.	Self-essence	cannot	be	hurt	or
destroyed.	 Self-essence	 is	 often	 difficult	 to	 see	 because	 we	 see	 from	 Self-
essence.	 From	 Self-essence	 there	 is	 seeing	 the	whole	without	 the	 feeling	 of	 a
particular	location	of	a	seer.	Self-essence	is	the	foundation	of	all	expressions	of
Self,	 although	 its	 subtlety	 is	 often	 not	 felt	 directly	 because	 it	 is	 so	 close,	 so
invisible,	and	is	not	a	state.

Self-essence	 is	 not	 known	 as	 an	 object	 but	 knows	 itself	 first	 as	 awake



awareness.	 It	 is	 unconditioned	 and	 is	 inherent	 within	 our	 conditioning	 and
precedes	 energy:	 it	 is	 that	 from	which	 energy	 arises.	We	can	 learn	 to	 let	 parts
know	that	they	are	safe	to	give	us	more	space	or	to	step	back	to	discover	Self-
essence.	Self-essence	is	the	transcendent	clear	light	of	awareness.

FACET	TWO SELF-ENERGY

Self-essence	 arises	 or	 comes	 into	 existence	 as	 energy.	 It	 is	 like	 the	 quantum
field:	Self-essence	is	an	invisible	source,	prior	to	energy.	In	turn,	Self-energy	is
both	wave—flowing	boundless	dynamism	with	relational	qualities—and	particle
—active,	compassionate,	embodied,	and	full	of	vitality.	The	waves	and	particles
are	made	of	the	invisible	potential	of	the	quantum	field	of	Self-essence.

Self-energy	 is	connected	 through	 the	 type	of	awake	awareness	we	know	as
awareness-energy.	 It	 is	 how	 we	 feel	 the	 sense	 of	 interconnected	 relationship
from	Self	to	parts	within	us	and	with	other	people	and	all	things	around	us.	It	is
from	Self-essence	that	Self-energy’s	natural	qualities	arise	as	creative	energetic
expressions.	Self-energy	is	the	healing	light	of	liberation,	as	there	is	the	capacity
for	movement,	expression,	and	transformation.

The	qualities	of	Self-energy,	or	eight	Cs,1	created	by	Schwartz	are:

Calm Curiosity Compassion

Confidence Courage Clarity

Connectedness Creativity 	

FACET	THREE SELF-LEADERSHIP

Self	is	grounded	in	Self-essence,	interconnected	and	related	through	Self-energy,
and	acts	 from	Self-leadership.	Self-leadership	 is	 the	ability	 to	create	and	relate
from	open-hearted	awareness	and	heart-mind.	With	Self-leadership,	we	unblend
and	 shift	 the	 location	of	our	 identity	 from	parts	 to	Self.	 In	Self-leadership,	we
can	 feel	 the	 spacious	 awareness	 of	 Self-essence	 and	 Self-energy’s	 dynamic
aliveness,	 full	embodiment,	and	 the	compassionate	 relationship	 to	all	parts	and
people.	 From	 Self-leadership,	 you	 can	 make	 choices	 while	 being	 free	 of	 the
agendas	 of	 parts.	 Being	 in	 Self-leadership	 does	 not	 get	 rid	 of	 parts	 or	 reduce
parts	to	a	smoothie,	but,	as	Dan	Siegel	says,	it	is	more	like	a	colorful	fruit	salad



of	parts.2

Schwartz’s	nine	Ps	of	Self-leadership3	are:

Patience Persistence Perspective

Presence Pure	Perception Peace

Precision Purpose Playfulness

In	Self-leadership,	we	speak	for	parts	rather	than	from	parts.	Self	knows	that
all	is	well	while	also	having	the	motivation	to	actively	be	part	of	the	solutions	in
the	 world.	 Self-leadership	 operates	 from	 our	 compassionate,	 wise	 heart-mind
connected	 to	Self-essence,	 as	 if	using	Wi-Fi	 to	bring	personal	 information	and
memory	files	down	from	the	office	of	our	head	 to	our	new	home	in	our	heart-
mind.	Self-leadership	feels	grounded	in	Self-essence,	feels	itself	within	our	body,
and	feels	the	parts	with	Self-energy	as	it	looks	out	from	the	eyes	of	the	heart	to
people	 and	 to	 the	 world	 with	 new	 motivation	 and	 vision	 for	 action.	 Self-
leadership	is	simultaneously	aware	of	all	the	dimensions	of	Self,	our	parts,	and
other	 people	 and	 the	 world.	 Self-leadership	 has	 the	 light	 of	 compassionate
wisdom	in	action.

Your	Self-Driving	Vehicle
What	I’ve	done	above	is	look	at	awake	awareness,	awareness-energy,	and	open-
hearted	awareness	through	the	lens	of	Self.	This	is	who	we	are	and	how	we	are
being	 when	 we	 are	 experiencing	 different	 levels	 of	 awareness.	 Note	 that
language	becomes	 tricky	here:	Self	and	awake	awareness	are	 two	views	of	 the
same	 thing.	 We	 are	 that	 awake	 awareness,	 and	 we	 call	 it	 by	 the	 name	 of
whatever	“Self”	term	correlates	with	it.	The	difference	is	in	the	nuance:	when	we
talk	about	awake	awareness,	we	 talk	about	perception,	how	we	are	perceiving;
when	we	talk	about	Self,	we	talk	about	identity	and	who	we	perceive	ourselves
to	be.

It	is	important	to	note	that	overly	emphasizing	one	dimension	of	Self	without
staying	 connected	 to	 all	 dimensions	 of	 Self	 can	 lead	 to	 an	 imbalance—
bypassing,	 underpassing,	 or	 overpassing.	 If	 we	 are	 overly	 focused	 on	 Self-
essence,	we	 can	 become	 spaced	 out,	 transcendent,	 and	 impersonally	 detached.
Imbalanced	Self-energy	can	lead	to	taking	on	other	people’s	emotional	energy	or
continually	moving	 parts	 around	 on	 the	 chessboard	 of	 the	 psyche.	 It	 can	 also



lead	to	being	a	“bliss	ninny,”	“hippy-happy,”	or	an	unmotivated	couch	potato.
Being	too	imbalanced	in	trying	to	be	in	Self-leadership	from	a	part	can	lead

to	becoming	an	outwardly	focused	helper	or	an	activist	who	burns	out	by	feeling
disconnected	 and	 not	 resourcing	with	 the	 Source	 of	 Self.	 Notice,	 though,	 that
Self-leadership,	 as	 open-hearted	 awareness,	 is	 indeed	 how	 I’m	 defining	 our
interconnected	whole,	 true	Self.	 So	when	 I	 point	 out	 this	 imbalance	 related	 to
Self-leadership,	 it	 is	 not	 that	 Self-leadership	 itself	 is	 imbalanced,	 but	 instead,
what	will	tie	us	in	knots	is	an	attempt	to	be	in	Self-leadership	when	we	are	in	a
part	 that	 is	 thinking	 that	 it	 is	 true	 Self	 when	 it	 is	 not.	 What’s	 necessary	 is
acquiring	 the	 discernment	 to	 tell	 the	 difference—as	 sometimes	 we	 can	 have
blind	 spots!	 This	 is	 when	 it	 is	 helpful	 to	 be	 reflected	 by	 friends,	 a	 healing
practitioner,	 or	 even	paying	attention	 to	 cause	 and	 effect	 from	our	 actions	 and
choices.

It	 is	 from	 the	 heart-mind,	 the	 all-embracing,	 compassionate,	 open-hearted
awareness	 of	 Self-leadership,	 that	we	 are	 able	 to	meet	 and	 embrace	 our	 parts.
When	we	 do,	we	 recognize	 them	 and	 bring	 them	 back	 to	 Self	 so	 that	we	 can
have	 integration	 and	wholeness.	A	 good	way	 to	 do	 this	 is	with	 some	mindful
glimpses.

GLIMPSE Know	Your	Self

Recognizing	Self	leads	us	to	a	new	kind	of	Self-compassion	practice.	In	the
usual	self-compassion	practices,	who	is	compassionate	to	whom?	What	self	is
compassionate	to	what	self?	This	usually	means	that	a	part	is	trying	to	have
compassion	for	another	part.	In	the	following	approach,	we	realize	that	who	we
are	is	not	a	small	self	but	many	parts.	Then,	rather	than	a	part	having	compassion
for	different	parts	of	“yourself,”	there	is	a	discovery	of	Self,	which	has	natural
compassion	for	the	whole.	This	mindful	glimpse	can	also	be	done	with	another
person.

1. Can	you	feel	an	emotional	or	energetic	pattern	you’re	aware	of	in	or
around	your	body?	What	is	the	shape,	size,	location,	and	feeling	of
this	part?

2. Can	you	thank	this	part	and	ask	it	to	unblend	and	open	some	space?

3. From	this	space,	rest	as	the	awareness	that	is	aware.	How	do	you



feel	toward	this	part,	not	from	your	head	but	from	your	heart?	Is	this
part	aware	that	you	are	here	with	it?	Is	this	part	aware	of	your
feelings	toward	it?

4. Is	there	anything	this	part	wants	to	let	you	know?

5. When	this	part	turns	to	be	aware	of	You,	what	does	it	experience	as
the	size,	location,	and	feeling	of	You?

6. How	does	it	feel	to	be	aware	from	your	heart	toward	this	pattern
within	your	body?

7. How	is	it	being	open-hearted	Self	with	your	body	and	these	parts?	

Accessing	Our	True	Self
Now	that	we’ve	reviewed	three	types	of	Self	that	correlate	with	the	three	types
of	awareness	we’ve	covered	previously,	we	can	notice	and	practice	how	infinite,
dynamic,	loving,	and	capable	of	meeting	life	our	true	Self	is	in	all	of	its	aspects.
We	 can	 realize	 that	 we	 are	 this	 infinite,	 loving	 Self,	 and	 whenever	 we	 feel
disconnected	 and	 contracted,	 we’re	 probably	 in	 a	 part	 of	 us—a	 part	 that
somehow	 got	 cut	 off	 from	 the	 whole	 and	 has	 forgotten	 “home.”	When	we’re
fully	 identified	with	 that	part,	 thinking	 that	 that	 is	 “me,”	we	end	up	 living	 life
through	 its	 lens	 and	 act	 through	 its	 beliefs	 and	 agendas,	 which	 might	 create
havoc!	Instead,	when	we	take	a	step	back	to	unblend	from	whatever	part	we	are
blended	with,	we	can	remember	how	to	unhook	awareness	to	return	to	our	Self-
essence.	Then,	from	Self-energy,	we	can	see	the	part	we	were	blended	with	and
begin	 to	 listen	 to	 its	 story.	Then,	 from	Self-leadership,	we	can	 finally	embrace
our	parts	and	welcome	them	back	home	to	our	Self.	Each	time	we	get	to	know
the	 exiled	 parts	 in	 this	way,	we	 become	 increasingly	 aware	 of	 our	wholeness.
From	here,	we’re	ready	to	move	on	to	sustained	awakening—training	to	remain
awake	from	Self-leadership.



T

8

How	to	Remain	Awake

he	 most	 fundamental	 aspect	 of	 awakening	 is	 the	 shift	 in	 our
understanding	of	who	we	are.	Our	culture,	upbringing,	and	mind	have	all	created
a	sense	of	“me”	that	is	based	on	a	thinking	self:	“I	think,	therefore	I	am.”	Even
when	 experiencing	 awake	 awareness,	 awareness-energy,	 or	 open-hearted
awareness,	we	have	missed	the	point	if	we	think	that	these	experiences	are	“cool
meditation	states”	and	then	return	to	our	regular	lives.	These	types	of	awareness
are	not	states	of	mind;	 these	are	dimensions	of	our	 interconnected,	whole	Self.
Shifting	 into	 Self	 is	 not	 just	 an	 exercise	 of	 imagination	 or	 a	 psychological
practice	that	our	thinking	parts	do	when	we	are	in	crisis	or	feel	a	need	to	care	for
our	 hurt	 child	 parts.	Experiencing	 life	 through	 the	 eyes	of	 our	 true	Self	 is	 our
natural	human	potential.

We	take	the	first	step	on	the	path	to	awakening	when	we	realize	that	we	are	a
different	Self	than	we	originally	understood.	When	we	taste	this	shift	in	identity,
it	is	an	“aha!”	moment.	We	feel	like	we	have	seen	behind	the	veil	of	separation
and	understood	something	so	crucial	that	we	never	forget	it.	We	realize	that	we
are	so	much	more	capable	of	love	and	more	whole	than	we	ever	imagined.

This	initial	shift	can	often	be	experienced	as	deep	relief,	letting	go,	or	a	sense
of	 homecoming.	 From	 our	 shift	 of	 Self,	 we	 are	 able	 to	 see	 how	 we	 are
compassionate	 creators	 in	 the	world,	 how	we	 are	 lovable	 no	matter	what,	 and
how	our	problems	are	held	within	 something	much	 larger.	We	are	happier	and
more	fulfilled	than	we	could	have	imagined	because	there	is	no	conditionality	to
our	well-being;	we	 intimately	 feel	how	we	are	 innately	perfect	and	well.	Once
we	 directly	 experience	 this	 reality,	 even	 if	 just	 for	 a	 moment,	 we	 may	 feel
changed	 at	 our	 core	 (although	 we	 have	 not	 changed	 into	 something	 new	 but
rather	come	into	our	true	Self	that	has	been	there	the	whole	time).

Once	we	experience	a	shift	into	Self,	something	funny	happens:	often,	even



if	we	think	our	realization	will	last	forever,	eventually	we	find	ourselves	back	in
a	more	contracted,	habitual	experience	of	small	self.	While	we	may	have	thought
that	living	from	our	awareness	of	our	true	Self	would	easily	continue,	we	come
to	realize	that	we	need	to	go	through	an	unfolding	process	for	our	awakening	to
abide	as	Self-leadership.	By	“abide,”	 I	mean	a	background-to-foreground	shift,
where	 open-hearted	 awareness	 remains	 primary	 and	 becomes	 where	 we	 are
viewing	 and	 living	 from.	Abiding	 is	 a	 dynamic	moment-to-moment	 unfolding
within	the	ground	of	awake	awareness	that	does	not	come	and	go.

From	 the	 ultimate	 level	 of	 reality,	 we	 could	 say	 there	 is	 no	 process	 of
abiding,	 no	 journey,	 and	 no	 path.	 The	 essential	 awake	 awareness	 is	 always
present	 and	 does	 not	 change	 or	 develop.	Awake	 awareness	 is	 already	 abiding,
even	when	 our	 human	 experiences	 are	 changing	 and	 passing	 away.	 The	 small
self	 does	 not	 awaken,	 and	 the	 true	 Self	 is	 not	 a	 stable	 entity	 or	 person.
Awakening	 is	 simply	a	 shift	 of	view	 to	 look	at	 the	 interconnected	whole	 from
open-hearted	 awareness.	We	 have	 explored	 how	 there	 is	 no-self,	 and	 yet	 this
does	not	lead	to	us	being	robots	or	puppets	of	awake	awareness.	There	is	a	play
of	 yin/yang,	 Shakti/Shiva,	 divine/human,	 transcendent/immanent,	 which	 is	 a
dance	of	formless	awake	awareness	and	our	human	form.

I	have	met	people	who	have	had	an	initial	waking	up	from	small	self	who	get
stuck	in	this	first	stage	in	the	unfolding	of	full	awakening.	This	is	because	initial
waking	up	is	not	enough,	and	there	is	no	one	so	evolved	that	they	do	not	have	to
go	 through	 an	 unfolding	 process	 to	 live	 from	 an	 embodied	 open-hearted
awareness.	As	we	awaken,	we	do	not	become	perfect	by	any	means,	but	we	do
have	a	wholly	different	way	of	knowing,	being,	 and	experiencing	 life	 than	we
did	when	we	were	identified	with	a	smaller	ego-self.	We	can	delve	even	deeper
by	examining	what	goes	on	during	this	stage	of	awakening	into	Self-leadership.

Why	It	Is	Hard	to	Remain	in	Self-Leadership
The	first	hint	about	why	it	is	hard	to	remain	in	Self-leadership	is	that	the	“you”
that	wants	 to	 remain	awake	 is	not	you!	The	entire	abiding	experience	will	 feel
paradoxical	to	the	thinking	manager	“you,”	which	will	likely	think	that	nothing
on	 this	 path	 of	 awakening	makes	 any	 sense!	 Indeed,	 the	 reason	many	 people
haven’t	 yet	 awakened	 is	 because	 the	 small	 self	 is	 being	 run	 by	 their	 survival
operating	system	and	the	expectations	of	our	culture.

Here	 is	where	 a	 transitionally	 helpful	 spiritual	 ego,	meditator,	manager,	 or
Self-like	part	can	be	a	trap	if	not	recognized.	This	is	where	a	wise	teacher,	like	a



good	car	mechanic,	who	has	been	through	the	transitions	from	small	self	to	Self-
leadership	can	give	pointers	for	maintenance	of	your	Self-driving	vehicle	and	a
tune-up	to	get	you	back	on	the	road.

At	first,	we	may	think	that	Self	is	a	part	of	us	or	a	state,	such	as	silence	or
stillness,	but	in	order	for	Self	to	remain	primary—the	place	we	view	from	rather
than	what	we	view—Self	must	get	 to	know	itself.	We	must	avoid	being	pulled
into	 the	mind	by	 the	old	egoic	structure	and	 its	defenses,	which,	 for	 their	own
survival,	are	wanting	to	convince	you	that	Self	is	just	a	“meditation	state”	so	that
they	can	remain	in	the	driver’s	seat—a	Self-like	part	playing	the	role	of	Self.

How	do	we	get	to	know	Self?	First,	we	learn	how	to	let	go	of	the	small	self
that	is	currently	leading.	We	first	need	to	get	it	out	of	the	driver’s	seat	so	greater
Self	can	sit	 in	it	(even	though	it	has	been	waiting	in	the	background	the	whole
time).	 The	 key	 in	 this	 effortless	mindfulness	 approach	 is	 to	 shift	 immediately
into	 the	 new	 operating	 system	 of	 awake	 awareness	 rather	 than	 just
deconstructing	 the	 small	 self.	 Awakening	 and	 stabilizing	 our	 awakening	 is	 as
much	 a	 process	 of	 unlearning	 as	 learning.	 It	 is	 going	 to	 take	 effortless
mindfulness	to	change	the	old	habit	of	remaining	in	our	small	self	and	to	learn	to
let	go	into	open-hearted	awareness,	which	sustains	itself	naturally.

One	student	expressed	this	stage	of	moving	from	effort	 to	effortlessness	by
saying,	“Not	knowing	has	been	such	a	gift	because	it	means	that	I	can	give	up	all
the	trying.	I	can	give	up	wanting	things	to	be	a	certain	way,	and	I	can	just	let	go.
I	can’t	express	how	free	I	feel	in	letting	go	of	that	striving.	It	is	then	that	I	notice
a	 new	 knowing	 that	 is	 alert,	 safe,	 and	 wise.	 I	 don’t	 have	 to	 go	 back	 to	 my
thinking	 mind	 to	 try	 to	 confirm	 anything,	 and	 there	 is	 so	 much	 peace	 and
freedom	in	that.”

This	transition	into	“don’t	know	mind”	can	feel	like	the	moment	we	released
our	parent’s	hand	when	we	were	a	kid	on	the	first	day	of	kindergarten.	But	here,
as	we	move	 toward	 the	unknown,	 toward	 the	greater	Self,	we	are	 letting	go	of
the	ego	identity’s	hand.	We	must	learn	to	bear	the	arising	of	unpleasant	messages
from	our	ego	managers	that	are	yelling	“Danger!”	from	the	repressed	contents	of
our	 psyche	 and	 from	 our	 protective	 parts	 and	 inner	 children	 calling	 out	 to	 be
seen	and	processed.	The	danger	signal	at	this	stage	is	like	a	car	alarm	going	off
with	 no	 threat	 to	 the	 vehicle.	 Can	 we	 sit	 in	 the	 fire	 of	 these	 transitional
moments?

The	key	experience	of	this	stage	is	a	shift	through	the	unknown	into	the	new
knowing	 of	 awake	 awareness.	We	 can	 think	 about	 it	 like	 swinging	 on	 a	 rope
that’s	 hanging	 from	a	 tree	 branch	 that	 reaches	 from	 the	 shore	out	 over	 a	 lake.



Letting	 go	 of	 the	 rope	 to	 jump	 into	 the	 water	 can	 be	 frightening	 because	 we
relinquish	 control	 of	 our	 grip	 on	 safety.	 The	 water	 isn’t	 like	 the	 land	 we	 left
behind,	 but	 when	 we	 are	 in	 it,	 we’ll	 find	 that	 it	 is	 a	 place	 that	 brings	 joy,
refreshment,	and	a	new	kind	of	support.	This	 is	how	it	 feels	 to	 transition	 from
small	separate	self	to	interconnected	whole	Self.

We	transition	 through	 the	gap	of	“not	knowing”	for	what	can	be	a	short	or
long	period	of	time	in	our	lives	when	we	don’t	have	an	understanding	of	who	we
really	 are,	 what	 we’re	 doing,	 or	 what	 we’re	 here	 for.	 This	 natural	 part	 of	 the
journey	can	feel	scary,	but	we	don’t	have	to	get	stuck	here	as	we	have	learned
early	on	to	resource	with	the	new	operating	system	of	awake	awareness.

The	Dos	and	Don’ts	of	Awakening
A	main	reason	we	experience	so	much	unknown	is	that	we	are	changing	drivers
in	the	vehicle	that	is	our	sense	of	self.	In	the	past,	we	had	a	competent	manager
part	 that	was	 on	 duty	 sitting	 in	 the	 driver’s	 seat	 of	 our	 sense	 of	 self,	 vigilant
about	our	experience,	managing	our	choices,	and	analyzing	things.	Moving	into
living	 from	Self	 requires	 removing	 this	manager	 from	 the	driver’s	 seat	 so	 that
Self	can	sit	 there.	Self	 is	not	a	new	manager,	but	 it	does	need	 to	acknowledge
and	connect	to	the	managers	and	functional	parts	of	our	body	and	mind.

The	small	self’s	strongest	survival	programming	is	a	series	of	four	“don’ts”
and	six	“shoulds.”	Here	are	the	four	“don’ts”	of	the	small	self	and	the	solutions
from	the	interconnected	Self:

1. Don’t	go	out	of	your	mind.	To	find	your	ground	of	Self,	you	need	to
go	against	your	ego’s	strongest	rules	of	survival.	When	you	do,	you
end	up	realizing	that	it	is	sane	for	local	awareness	to	go	out	of	your
small	mind	to	discover	the	source	of	mind—awake	awareness.

2. Don’t	become	nobody.	As	you	follow	your	intention	of	living	as
your	true	Self	and	let	go	into	the	unknown,	you	will	go	through	a
sense	of	becoming	“nobody.”	Don’t	worry.	This	is	normal.	In	this
phase,	you’re	not	becoming	a	blank	slate	or	a	robot;	you	are	simply
not	feeling	like	the	somebody	you	thought	you	were.	As	you	move
through	the	gap	of	“nobody”	into	awake	awareness,	you’ll
increasingly	start	to	feel	the	ground	of	your	Self.



3. Don’t	lose	control.	The	old	identity	has	to	lose	control	and	release,
let	go,	or	surrender	for	a	moment	in	order	for	the	new	ground	of	Self
to	emerge.	This	can	feel	disorienting	since	we’ve	been	deeply
conditioned	to	control	everything	and	to	desire	predictability.	But	it
is	a	normal	and	liberating	phase	of	awakening	to	experience
disorientation	before	reorientation.

4. Don’t	stop	thinking.	When	you	stop	relying	on	thought-based
knowing,	you	don’t	become	dumb	or	ignorant.	Instead,	you	move
beyond	the	dualistic	mind’s	limited	way	of	knowing	to	a	new	kind
of	wisdom	that	is	naturally	available.

Here	 are	 the	 six	 “shoulds”	 of	 the	 small	 self	 and	 the	 solutions	 from	 the
interconnected	Self:

1. I	should	be	the	small	self	to	know.	How	can	I	know	if	I	don’t	think?
The	small	self	comes	in	with	doubt	and	fear	to	say,	“You	need	to	go
to	thought	and	know	conceptually.”	Instead,	there	is	a	new,
nonconceptual	not-knowing	that	knows,	a	heart-knowing	that	is
prior	to	thought.	Only	when	we	stop	trying	to	understand	things
through	our	dualistic	thoughts	will	we	start	to	receive	a	direct
knowing	that	can	come	through	a	deeper	connection	to	the	space
and	silence	of	awake	awareness.

2. I	should	be	the	small	self	to	be	safe.	Who	will	keep	me	safe	if	I	don’t
construct	plans	and	protect	myself	with	vigilance?	We	are	drawn
back	to	the	parts-based	identity	to	be	safe.	Instead,	the	ground	of
Self	provides	a	way	to	be	safe	without	constantly	scanning	for
danger.	A	new	sense	of	safety	emerges	as	we	feel	Self	beyond	the
stories	of	our	lives,	which	is	safer	than	we	feel	through	the	ego
managers.	As	for	day-to-day	safety	issues,	our	intuition	shows	us
the	way,	and	our	thinking	mind	is	still	available	for	problem	solving
when	we	need	it.

Another	safety	concern	might	come	up	in	the	mind’s	eye	when
we	surrender	into	the	gap	of	no-self	on	our	way	to	the	greater
freedom	of	Self.	The	deeper	level	of	the	small	self	program	is	to
avoid	its	own	death,	so	the	transition	through	egolessness	or	no-self



feels	like	who	we	are	is	threatened	with	nonexistence.	The	best
thing	to	do	here	is	to	know	that	this	experience	of	no-self	as	we
release	from	the	small	self	is	normal,	as	is	the	fear,	and	they	will
both	naturally	pass	as	we	emerge	into	something	greater.

3. I	should	be	the	small	self	to	avoid	pain.	We	feel	like	we	should
return	to	the	parts-based	identity	to	avoid	emotional	and	physical
pain.	Ironically,	it	is	when	we	try	to	avoid	pain	that	it	turns	into
suffering.	Our	thinking	mind	often	tries	to	rationalize	away	difficult
emotions,	physical	sensations,	or	painful	life	events.	Our	small	self
does	not	have	the	capacity	to	live	a	fully	intimate,	emotional	human
life	because	when	living	from	the	small	self,	we	can	often	be
avoidant	of	experience.	From	Self-leadership,	we	can	lovingly
approach	pain	rather	than	fearfully	avoid	it.	We	can	find	an
acceptance	of	the	normal	unpleasant	experiences	in	life	and	release
the	suffering	that	we	have	about	our	pain.	We	operate	from	an
awareness	that	is	able	to	be	with	unpleasant	feelings	without
pushing	them	away	and	is	able	to	be	with	pleasant	feelings	without
clinging	to	them.	Our	inner	intelligence	can	also	distinguish
between	real	danger	signals,	false	alarms,	and	growing	pains.

4. I	should	be	the	small	self	to	function.	We	may	feel	that	we	should
return	to	the	parts-based	identity	to	take	actions	and	do	things	in	the
world.	Indeed,	the	small	mind	and	ego	functioning	are	superb	at
certain	tasks,	such	as	problem	solving,	planning,	and	other	types	of
organizing.	It	is	important	to	note	that	in	growing	from	small	self	to
greater	Self,	we	are	not	abandoning	the	small	mind;	we	are	no
longer	pretending	that	the	small	mind	is	what	“I”	am.	Instead,	“I”
can	use	the	thinking	mind	as	a	tool,	among	other	tools	to	choose
from.	As	we	shift	from	parts-based	identity	to	Self,	there	is	a
rewiring	that	allows	us	to	remain	at	home	in	heart-knowing	and
access	information	without	going	back	to	create	a	“doer,”	or	small
self.	From	here,	we	can	respond	rather	than	react.

5. I	should	be	separate	in	order	to	have	loving	relationships	with
others.	Individuation	is	indeed	important	as	a	developmental	stage
for	human	beings—to	learn	a	sense	of	autonomy,	to	know



boundaries,	to	be	able	to	feel	and	ask	for	our	needs.	Moving	from
small	self	to	interconnected	Self	does	not	mean	dissipating	our
boundaries,	being	a	codependent	personality	that	just	gives	in	to
everyone	else’s	needs,	or	being	too	vulnerable	to	function	in
relationship.	We	keep	the	skills	we	have	learned	in	our	individuation
process.	We	are	simply	including	and	transcending	individual	body-
mind	as	the	location	of	identity.	We	can	keep	our	individuation	as	a
location	point	in	time	and	space	while	we	simultaneously	operate	as
and	from	something	much	bigger.

Another	way	we	can	get	caught	in	the	illusion	of	needing	to	be
separate	is	if	we	believe	that	we	are	lovable	specifically	due	to	our
small	self.	We	feel	like	we	should	focus	on	our	personality,	our
looks,	and	the	way	we	act	to	be	loved.	In	other	words,	in	this	case,
we	are	still	seeing	love	as	conditional—conditional	upon	who	we
make	ourselves	to	be.	Instead,	from	Self,	we	experience	that	love	is
who	we	already	are.	We	are	love,	and	we	are	lovable
unconditionally.

6. I	should	try	to	improve	the	small	self	to	become	awake.	This	one	is
the	trickiest	obstacle	because	it	is	difficult	to	notice	when	it	is
happening.	This	is	when	the	small	self	“grows	up”	as	much	as	it	can
and	thinks	that	it	is	true	Self.	Because	the	small	self	thinks	it	should
become	more	developed	and	smarter,	it	is	unwilling	to	let	go	in
order	to	grow.	When	students	say,	“I	can’t	do	it,”	they	are	actually
right.	That	“I”	can’t	do	it!

The	small	self	desperately	screams,	“Do	not	leave	me!	If	I	am
not	in	charge,	I	will	die!”	But	this	is	not	what	will	happen.	While
doing	the	job	of	the	ego	function,	the	ego	managers	have	mistakenly
taken	on	the	role	of	identity.	In	awakening,	they	semi-retire	from
working	the	job	of	identity	and	return	to	their	natural	job	of	ego
function.

In	terms	of	waking	up	and	growing	up,	it	is	important	to	note
that	when	the	ego	strengths,	which	were	vital	for	our	previous	stage
of	development,	form	into	ego	identity,	this	acts	as	the	main
obstacle	to	the	next	stage	of	development	and	into	true	Self.

Living	from	Self-Leadership



We	have	believed	ourselves	 to	be	 the	parts-based	ego	 identity	 for	 so	 long	 that
letting	go	to	grow	beyond	it	can	feel	like	death.	What	is	dying	is	the	identity	role
that	 the	 manager	 parts	 have	 been	 playing;	 what	 is	 dying	 is	 the	 lens	 through
which	you	viewed	Self	and	 reality.	However,	 this	dying	allows	for	a	 transition
into	what	can	also	feel	like	rebirth.	This	kind	of	dying	is	like	a	seed	that	has	to
be	buried	underground	to	sprout	through	the	soil	and	grow	to	its	bigger	nature	as
a	tree.	It	requires	a	complete	letting	go—a	release	or	surrender.

This	kind	of	surrender	does	not	happen	if	we	fight,	push,	resist,	or	exert	too
much	effort.	While	the	small	self	does	go	through	a	kind	of	death,	it	doesn’t	die
if	 we	 try	 to	 kill	 it.	 Nor	 can	 it	 be	 fought,	 or	 even	 improved,	 into	 the
interconnected	Self.	It	is	important	to	respect	that	our	ego	managers	are	not	our
enemies;	they	have	developed	to	protect	us,	and	they	have	protected	us	when	we
needed	them.	They	deserve	honor,	not	destruction.

What	happens	if	we	fight	them,	deny	them,	or	try	to	shove	them	away?	Most
people	who	have	tried	to	get	rid	of	their	egos	have	reported	that	the	battle	ends
up	 strengthening	 the	 ego	defenses	or	 creates	 a	Self-like	 spiritual	 ego	manager.
When	 this	 happens,	 our	 personality	 can	 become	 similar	 to	 that	 of	 a	 religious
fundamentalist	who	is	convinced	of	 their	beliefs	but	 judges	everyone	else.	The
ego	manager	who	now	takes	the	role	as	spiritual	know-it-all	will	still	be	holding
a	 false	 sense	 of	 control	 and	 “knowledge”	 of	 how	 things	 are,	 without	 truly
submitting	to	the	don’t-know	mind	or	relinquishing	the	personal	will	in	order	for
the	natural	flow	of	open-hearted	awareness	to	guide	our	actions.

These	 managers	 have	 not	 yet	 allowed	 for	 humility	 to	 leave	 space	 for	 the
awakened	 Self	 to	 be	 fully	 open	 to	 the	 unknown.	 The	 “spiritual	manager”	 can
also	 do	 a	 great	 job	 at	 keeping	 certain	 tendencies—like	 overcontrol	 or
intellectualization—out	of	our	awareness,	blinding	us	to	areas	of	growth	we	need
to	integrate.	While	reading	about	these	spiritual	traps	and	detours,	it	is	helpful	to
remember	that	there	are	gradations	of	these	tendencies	rather	than	“I	have	that”
or	“I	don’t	have	 that	anymore.”	Most	of	us	undergo	all	of	 these	processes	 to	a
certain	extent.	They	are	deeply	wired	in	us!

Transitioning	 out	 of	 our	 conditioned	 ways	 is	 an	 unfolding.	 Self	 rarely
remains	at	the	seat	of	our	conscious	awareness	after	the	initial	glimpse.	The	ego
managers	 have	 established	 deep	 habits	 that	 prioritize	 safety	 and	 survival
according	to	their	programming,	and	the	perceived	need	for	safety	continues	to
reconstitute	 ego	 defenses	 that	 obscure	 awake	 awareness.	 But	 these	 innocent
habits	of	our	old	conditioning	will	gradually	subside	as	a	new	connection	to	the
ground	of	Self	and	heart-knowing	stabilizes.



Because	 Self	 naturally	 has	 qualities	 of	 acceptance,	 patience,	 compassion,
warmth,	 and	 equanimity,	 we	 begin	 to	 have	 a	 baseline	 of	 these	 qualities	 at	 all
times	 in	 a	way	 that	we	didn’t	 have	before,	 and	over	 time,	 that	 baseline	grows
stronger.	For	example,	a	student	told	me,	“Nowadays,	I’ve	noticed	that	no	matter
what	 is	happening	 in	my	work	or	 relationships,	 I	 feel	good	even	when	 I	don’t
feel	good.”	Remarkably,	we	can	experience	an	essential	happiness	regardless	of
what’s	 going	 on	 in	 our	 daily	 lives.	We	 feel	 an	 underlying	well-being	 because
Self	is	not	dependent	on	conditions	or	on	the	ongoing	difficulties	and	delights	of
daily	life.

Peer	Inquiries
Awakening	is	not	solely	an	individual	journey;	we	all	affect	each	other,	making	it
a	 social	 and	 community	 endeavor	 as	 well.	 I’ve	 developed	 six	 peer	 inquiry
practices	 that	 you	 can	 do	 with	 a	 partner,	 face-to-face	 or	 remotely.	 Each	 peer
inquiry	 practice	 is	 its	 own	 individual	 set	 of	 questions	 designed	 to	 help	 you
access	your	true	Self	and	speak	from	Self-leadership	to	another	person.	You	can
do	one	at	a	time	or	go	through	all	six	peer	inquiry	practices	in	a	row.

As	you	begin	each	peer	inquiry	practice,	decide	who	will	ask	first	and	who
will	 respond	 first.	 The	 person	 asking	 will	 read	 the	 first	 question,	 wait	 for	 a
response,	 then	 read	 the	 second	 question,	wait	 for	 a	 response,	 and	 so	 on,	 until
their	partner	has	responded	to	the	last	question.	Then	switch	roles.

Here	are	pointers	for	the	process:

• Understand	the	words	of	the	inquiry.

• Unhook	awareness	from	thinking	and	allow	awareness	to	look	back	and
know	directly	with	awareness.

• From	this	new	awareness-based	knowing,	let	words	arise	and	speak	them
without	going	to	thinking.

• It	is	not	so	important	what	your	answer	is	but	that	you	look	with
awareness	and	learn	to	speak	and	relate	to	another	person	from
awareness-based	knowing.



GLIMPSE Peer	Inquiry	Practice	1

1. Who	is	hearing?

2. Where	is	the	hearer?

3. What	is	here	if	there	is	no	problem	to	solve	now?	

GLIMPSE Peer	Inquiry	Practice	2

1. Tell	me	about	what	is	aware	without	going	to	thought.

2. Tell	me	about	that	which	is	aware,	which	is	beyond	words.

3. What	is	aware	of	the	six	senses?

4. Does	this	awareness	have	a	color,	shape,	or	location?

5. What	is	it	like	if	awareness	knows	the	six	senses	from	within?	

GLIMPSE Peer	Inquiry	Practice	3

1. When	awareness	drops	below	the	neck	and	opens,	what	does	this
open-hearted	awareness	know?

2. What	does	the	welcoming	heart	know?

3. Is	this	awake	awareness	an	experience	occurring	to	you,	or	is	this
who	you	are?

4. What	is	the	relationship	between	awareness	and	any	unpleasant
feelings?

5. What	is	the	relationship	between	awareness	and	beliefs	and	stories?



6. What	is	the	relationship	between	awareness	and	the	fear	of	the	fear
of	death?	

GLIMPSE Peer	Inquiry	Practice	4

1. What	is	aware	of	movement	and	mental	sensations?

2. Where	is	the	“I”?

3. Is	there	anything	missing	or	anything	that	needs	to	be	pushed	away?

4. Can	you	live	from	open-hearted	awareness?	

GLIMPSE Peer	Inquiry	Practice	5

1. What	is	here	before	the	“I”	thought	arises?

2. Is	this	awake	awareness	an	experience,	or	is	it	me?	Is	it	what	is?

3. What	does	open-hearted	awareness	know?	

GLIMPSE Peer	Inquiry	Practice	6

1. Who	is	hearing?

2. Where	is	the	hearer?

3. Where	are	we	hearing	from?

4. What	is	here,	now,	when	there	is	no	problem	to	solve?

5. Where	are	you	aware	from?

6. Tell	me	about	the	awareness	that	is	knowing.



7. What	does	everything	feel	like	as	awareness-energy?

8. What	do	you	know	from	your	heart?	

These	 peer	 inquiries	 can	 help	make	 the	 transition	 from	 a	 passive	 stage	 of
resting	as	awake	awareness	to	rewiring,	talking,	and	walking	from	open-hearted
awareness.	This	can	also	build	community.	When	you	finish	the	series	with	each
other,	continue	to	talk	about	other	things	in	your	life	from	this	new	awareness-
based	way	of	knowing	and	relating.	The	goal	is	for	us	all	to	awaken	together	and
help	others	from	our	natural	compassionate	motivation.



I

9

Glimpsing	All	the	Way	Home

hope	 you	 are	 enjoying	 this	 journey	 of	 effortless	 mindfulness	 and	 have
found	some	helpful	mindful	glimpses	to	discover	a	true	taste	of	freedom.	I	also
hope	you	will	 continue	 in	 the	way	of	 effortless	mindfulness	 in	your	daily	 life.
Waking	 up	 and	 growing	 up	 both	 need	 consistency	 to	 change	 the	 old	 habits	 of
consciousness	to	a	new	normal.	However,	consistency	is	not	easy.	As	you	know
from	 other	 helpful	 habits	 that	 need	 regular	 practice,	 like	 exercising,	 eating
vegetables,	 drinking	 water,	 and	 brushing	 your	 teeth,	 the	 main	 support	 of
effortless	 mindfulness	 is	 consistency—small	 glimpses,	 many	 times	 during	 the
day.

You	may	 have	 noticed	 the	 everyday	 chattering	mind	 starts	 to	 establish	 its
habit	 of	 creating	 a	 small	 self	 or	 “mini-me”	 first	 thing	 in	 the	 morning.	 So	 a
morning	meditation	is	important	to	transition	from	sleep	to	wakeful	living.	You
might	 enjoy	 this	 unique	 suggestion,	 which	 is	 to	 do	 a	 mindful	 glimpse	 in	 the
morning	while	still	in	bed.	When	you	wake	up	in	bed,	hit	the	snooze	alarm	and
roll	 over	on	your	back.	Then	you	can	use	your	 smartphone	 (with	 earphones	 if
you’re	 not	 alone)	 or	 do	 a	mindful	 glimpse	 from	memory	 as	 a	 transition	 from
dream/sleep	to	“waking	up”	in	both	senses	of	the	phrase.

Alternatively,	begin	by	getting	out	of	bed	and	finding	a	place	to	sit	with	your
eyes	 open	 or	 closed	 for	 your	morning	mindful	 glimpse.	 Start	 your	meditation
session	with	a	way	of	settling	 in	and	calming	your	animal	body	and	brain	 that
works	for	you.	This	 is	where	many	people	find	deliberate	mindfulness	practice
to	 be	 especially	 helpful.	 A	 breath	 practice,	 chanting,	 prayer,	 chi	 gong,	 yoga,
lovingkindness,	checking	in	with	your	inner	parts,	dedicating	your	practice	to	all
beings,	 and/or	 connecting	 to	 your	 supports	 can	 be	 helpful	 before	 a	 mindful
glimpse.

Tune	 in,	marinate,	 and	 entrain	 your	 brain	 to	 begin	 the	 day	 from	 effortless



mindfulness	as	best	you	can.	This	 first	 fine-tuning	of	your	operating	system	 is
important.	 The	 main	 shift	 is	 moving	 from	 looking	 to	 thoughts	 to	 looking	 to
awareness,	which	 looks	 to	 itself.	Then	awake	awareness	can	 include	 thoughts,
feelings,	and	energy	arising	as	effortless	mindfulness	embodied.

You	can	set	an	alert	in	the	calendar	on	your	smartphone	to	remind	you	to	do
mindful	 glimpses	 throughout	 the	 day.	You	 can	 record	 the	mindful	 glimpses	 in
your	 own	 voice	 or	 listen	 to	 one	 of	my	 recordings.	 It	 is	 particularly	 helpful	 to
learn	to	do	the	mindful	glimpses	with	eyes	open,	such	as	while	looking	out	the
window,	walking,	or	looking	over	your	computer	screen,	and	you	can	then	return
to	your	daily	activities	from	effortless	heart-mindfulness.

Here	 is	 a	 simple	 guide	 to	 use	 as	 a	 reference	 to	 learn	 how	 to	 do	 small
glimpses	anytime	during	the	day:

REMEMBERING	TO	REMEMBER

1. Recognize	that	you	are	caught,	attached,	or	identified.

2. Realize	there	is	another	way	to	be.

3. Remember	a	glimpse	method	of	returning	or	re-recognizing	that	has
worked	for	you.

4. Unhook	local	awareness	by	unblending	with	thinking	or	a	part.	Let
awareness	turn	around	to	spacious	awareness	or	move	down	within
the	body.

5. Shift	into	already	awake	awareness.

6. Feel	awareness	aware	of	itself.

7. See	the	dance	between	formlessness	and	form	from	awareness-
energy.

8. Know	from	embodied	open-hearted	awareness.

9. Let	be	by	resting	as	the	Ground	of	Being	without	thinking	to	be	or
doing	to	be.	Marinate	and	mix	awake	awareness	and	aliveness.



Invite	all	parts,	thoughts,	and	emotions	into	the	boundless	Heart	and
tender	human	heart.

10. Remain	undistracted	without	effort.

11. Do	from	Being	by	beginning	to	rewire	your	brain	and	ego
functioning,	to	operate	from	open-hearted	awareness	and	Self-
leadership.

12. Detox,	welcome,	and	liberate	by	allowing	open-hearted	awareness	to
welcome	exiled	parts	and	unburden	protective	parts.

13. When	you	notice	you’ve	become	re-identified,	simply	say,	“No	big
surprise,	just	re-recognize.”

14. Then,	with	small	glimpses,	learn	to	return,	and	train	to	remain.

Your	 experiences	 doing	 the	 mindful	 glimpses	 are	 meant	 to	 be	 the	 most
important	takeaways	from	this	practice	book.	Not	even	the	best	writing	or	most
precise	intellectual	understanding	can	replace	your	intimate	experience	of	these
shifts	of	awareness.	Using	these	mindful	glimpses,	I	hope	you	are	able	to	get	a
taste	of	the	unconditional	love	that	you	truly	are.	I	hope	you	will	keep	this	book
close	as	a	guide	and	support	for	your	journey	of	compassionate	awakening.

Small	 awakenings	 may	 come	 from	 glimpses,	 surrendering,	 marinating,	 or
spontaneous	moments	that	we	can’t	foresee.	The	premise	of	mindful	glimpses	is
that	the	peace	and	love	we	seek	is	already	here,	and	it	can	be	intentionally	and
immediately	discovered.	We	do	not	have	to	wait	for	luck	or	grace	because	grace
is	 already	 here,	 even	 though	 it	may	 feel	 hidden.	 The	 paradoxical	 truth	 is	 that
there	is	always	awakeness	and	always	unfolding.	There	is	nothing	to	do	to	be	the
awake	awareness	that	you	already	are,	but	there	is	the	unfolding	relationship	and
intimate	dance	of	the	formless	and	form.

We	start	out	with	the	normal	way	we’ve	all	mostly	been	walking	around:	as
the	small	self,	with	the	small	thinking	mind	doing	its	best	to	care	for	itself,	using
attention	 to	 witness	 its	 pain,	 to	 embrace	 its	 circumstances,	 but	 also	 getting
overwhelmed	and	still	perceiving	itself	as	small	and	separate.

We’ve	now	learned	pointers	that	can	lead	us	into	immediate	awakenings,	that
open	us	out	of	what	the	thinker	“thought”	reality	was	and	into	a	new	view	and



new	 you.	 These	 “aha!”	moments	 (that	 are	 sometimes	 “ha-ha!”	moments)	may
last	a	few	seconds	or	may	move	us	from	a	meditation	state	to	a	new	stage	of	life.
The	 unfolding	 of	 our	 awakening	 often	 includes	 difficulties	 as	we	 stumble	 our
way	 toward	 living	 from	 open-hearted	 awareness.	 Awakening	 does	 not	 add	 or
change	anything	ultimately.	It	is	a	shift	of	the	background	already-stable	awake
awareness	 to	become	the	ground	of	our	seeing	and	being.	Awakening	shifts	us
out	 of	 our	 limited	 view	 that	 does	 not	 see	 awakeness	 and	 into	 a	 loving,
interconnected,	joyful	flow	of	life.

When	we	have	seen	through	the	constructs	of	who	we	thought	we	were,	the
most	 constant	 experience	 that	 remains	 is	 love,	 in	 its	multiple	 forms:	 gratitude,
patience,	acceptance,	compassion,	joy,	beauty,	and	bliss.	We	are	experiencing	all
of	 life	 from	 open-hearted	 awareness.	We	 find	 ourselves	 so	 effortlessly	 loving,
and	we	know	ourselves	as	fully	lovable.	And	more:	we	know	ourselves	as	love
itself.

As	 we	 live	 life,	 it	 doesn’t	 mean	 it	 will	 always	 be	 easy.	 Pain,	 loss,	 and
difficulties	are	a	natural	part	of	everyone’s	life,	yet	we	can	discover	the	support
of	effortless	mindfulness	to	open	us	to	interconnection	with	all	of	life.	We	are	all
on	the	same	journey	and	part	of	the	same	human	family.	I	admire	and	join	you	in
continuing	to	wake	up	and	grow	up	for	the	sake	of	all	beings.	I	have	found	that
the	shift	from	head	to	heart	leads	to	compassionate	activity	and	commitment	to
social	 justice.	We	can	develop	a	sense	of	courage	and	community	and	find	 the
well-being	and	love	that	are	within	us	and	unite	us	all	as	we	honor	and	thank	the
beautiful	mystery.



I

Appendix

Traps,	Detours,	and	Rerouting	Instructions

t	is	always	helpful	to	have	a	map	when	we	go	on	a	journey,	or	even	better,
a	 GPS	 system.	 Even	 if	 the	 voice	 in	 the	 GPS	 is	 a	 little	 mechanical,	 it	 can	 be
useful	 in	 those	 moments	 when	 we	 get	 off	 course	 and	 it	 magically	 says,
“Rerouting,”	and	then	gives	us	updated	directions.

Some	 of	 the	 most	 important	 instructions	 available	 from	 ancient	 wisdom
traditions	and	contemporary	psychology	include	pointers	regarding	the	potential
ways	people	can	get	stuck,	sidetracked,	lost,	or	confused	on	their	journey	home.
Below	are	 some	of	 the	most	 common	 traps	 and	detours	 that	 I	 have	noticed	 in
working	with	thousands	of	students.

SPACED	OUT

Once	you	unhook	local	awareness	from	thought	and	open	to	space,	you	will	feel
some	 relief	 and	 freedom	 from	 the	 chattering	mind.	 This	 is	 a	 crucial	 step,	 but
space	is	not	the	final	frontier.	We	do	not	want	to	remain	as	a	detached	mindful
witness	or	in	disembodied	pure	awareness.	While	the	first	step	is	to	discover	that
space	 is	 free	of	mental	obsession,	 the	next	step	 is	 to	discover	 that	space	 is	not
absence,	 but	 space	 itself	 is	 aware.	 We	 can	 then	 also	 discover	 that	 spacious
awareness	is	inherently	within	our	body.

BLISSED	IN

When	 you	 unhook	 local	 awareness	 and	 drop	 down	 below	 the	 neck,	 you	 will
experience	your	subtle	body	as	a	 return	 to	your	senses.	This	can	be	a	pleasant
state	 and	 is	 often	 experienced	 through	 practices	 like	 calm	 abiding,	 chanting,



mantra,	 dancing,	 music,	 massage,	 exercise,	 or	 drugs.	 If	 you	 get	 stuck	 here,
however,	you	can	become	a	“bliss	ninny”	or	be	only	“hippy-happy.”	While	this
experience	of	 the	subtle	body,	or	 inner	body	presence,	 is	free	of	 the	mind,	 it	 is
still	bound	by	our	skin	and	subtle	energy	body.	The	subtle	body	experience	is	not
yet	 open	 to	 spacious	 awareness,	 nor	 to	 the	 experience	 of	 interconnection	with
others.

STUCK	IN	STILLNESS

When	 local	 awareness	 unhooks	 from	 the	mind	 and	discovers	 inner	 stillness	 in
the	 body,	 we	 can	 fall	 back	 to	 sleep	 into	 the	 pleasant	 effects	 of	 the	 luscious
stillness.	 This	 experience,	 often	 discovered	 through	 long	 periods	 of	 sitting
meditation,	can	be	a	detour	because	it	has	stillness	but	does	not	have	movement
or	awareness.

THE	WITNESS	PROTECTION	PROGRAM

We	can	 get	 caught	 in	 the	 initial	 stage	 of	mindful	 observer	 or	witnessing	 from
spacious	awareness	and	try	to	live	from	the	meditative	tower	or	the	spacious	sky,
disconnected	 from	 the	 ocean	 of	 emotion.	 Once	 we	 are	 aware	 from	 spacious
awareness	that	we	are	free	of	identification	with	the	small	self,	it	is	still	possible
to	 land	 in	 a	 new	 dualistic	 view	 that	 is	 detached	 from	 both	 our	 body	 and	 the
interconnectedness	 with	 all	 things.	 This	 mindful	 witness	 is	 a	 key	 step	 of
transcendence,	but	it	is	not	the	end	goal.	If	we	live	as	the	detached	witness,	we
will	 be	 free	 of	 threat,	 but	 we	 will	 miss	 community	 and	 the	 juiciness	 of	 life.
Instead,	for	a	fully	embodied	experience	of	wholeness,	we	can	continue	on	our
journey	by	returning	from	spacious	awareness	back	to	the	boundless	aliveness	of
open-hearted	awareness.

GETTING	BORED	BACK	TO	THE	MIND

As	 we	 stabilize	 in	 a	 greater	 level	 of	 well-being,	 we	 will	 need	 to	 get	 used	 to
feeling	peace	of	mind.	The	transition	out	of	the	frenetic	activity	of	our	mind	at
first	may	come	as	a	relief	but	might	at	some	point	start	to	feel	like	a	withdrawal
from	the	level	of	excitement	and	drama	we	had	been	used	to.	In	this	gap	of	not-
knowing,	 a	 part	 of	 us	 may	 feel	 that	 the	 peace	 we	 had	 been	 seeking	 feels
unstimulating,	dull,	and	boring.	We	might	get	“bored	back	to	the	mind,”	seeking



more	 excitement.	 Instead,	 we	 can	 be	 encouraged	 to	 wait	 in	 this	 lull	 for	 the
natural	 curiosity,	 joy,	 and	 new	 knowing	 to	 appear	 from	 this	 place	 of	 peace.
Eventually,	a	different	kind	of	excitement	arises,	like	the	way	a	kid	feels	on	the
first	day	of	summer	vacation.	If	we	get	bored	back	to	the	mind,	we	can	notice	the
part	of	us	that	is	bored	and	learn	to	listen	to	it	and	welcome	it	from	open-hearted
awareness.

GETTING	SCARED	BACK	TO	THE	MIND

The	everyday	mind	has	been	our	primary	way	of	orienting	ourselves	for	identity
and	safety.	The	small	self	that	is	created	within	the	everyday	mind	operates	like	a
computer	that	has	been	programmed	to	follow	certain	rules.	Thought-free	awake
awareness	is	not	included	on	the	list	of	the	everyday	mind’s	approved	programs.
The	 everyday	 mind’s	 safety	 programs	 instead	 have	 rules	 like	 “Orient	 by
thought”	and	“Avoid	the	void,”	which	may	send	the	alerting	program	of	the	ego
defenses	into	a	panic.	So	when	we	shift	out	of	everyday	mind,	the	ego	defense
program	 reacts	 as	 if	 it	 were	 protecting	 us	 from	 death,	 but	 it	 is	 protecting	 a
limited	 thought	 pattern!	 The	 confusion	 happens	 because	 the	 small	 self	 sends
adrenaline	into	the	body	and	creates	a	feeling	of	fear	and	danger	as	if	there	were
a	 physical	 threat	 to	 the	 system.	 There	 is	 no	 real	 danger	 if	 you	 can	 shift	 into
awake	 awareness	 as	 the	new	operating	 system.	There	 still	may	be	 a	 car	 alarm
going	off,	but	 there	 is	no	 thief	 to	be	 found.	The	 feeling	of	 fear	 is	 real,	but	 the
reason	for	it	is	not.

If	you	get	scared	back	to	the	mind,	you	can	begin	to	glimpse	again.	As	you
do,	 you’ll	 learn	 to	 feel	 the	 fear	 and	 embrace	 the	 fear	 from	 awake	 awareness.
There	 will	 be	 a	 period	 of	 adjustment	 and	 growth	 that	 includes	 some
disorientation	before	reorientation.

GOING	BACK	TO	THE	MIND	FOR	A	SECOND	OPINION

Once	we	have	experienced	awake	awareness,	and	before	we	are	rewired	to	open-
hearted	 awareness,	 we	 can	 get	 drawn	 back	 to	 the	 small	 mind	 to	 try	 to	 know
whether	or	not	we’re	doing	it	 right.	The	small	mind	is	not	capable	of	knowing
about	 the	 fresh	 territory	 of	 awake	 awareness,	 but	 it	 will	 be	 glad	 to	 give	 an
opinion	like,	“This	is	ridiculous,”	or	“I	don’t	think	I’m	getting	it,	but	everyone
else	seems	to	be,”	or	“I	might	as	well	give	up,	I’m	never	going	to	get	this,”	or
the	subtler,	“Yes,	but	.	 .	 .”	The	small	mind	is	actually	right,	as	it	will	never	get



this—because	the	small	mind	can’t—but	you	already	are	this	awake	awareness,
which	 is	 the	 source	 of	 mind.	 The	 solution	 begins	 when	 we	 know	 from
nonconceptual	awake	awareness.

ATTENTION	OVERLOAD:	“PAYING”	ATTENTION	UNTIL	YOU	BECOME
BANKRUPT

The	main	reason	many	people	cannot	focus	is	not	attention	deficit	disorder	but
what	 I	 call	 attention	 overload	 disorder.	 You	 can	 use	 attention	 to	 develop	 the
skills	of	concentration	and	calm	focus,	but	you	can	easily	overexert	yourself	into
attention	overload	if	you	stop	development	at	this	stage	of	trying	to	concentrate
from	small	mind.	Attention	has	the	ability	to	be	precise	but	can	also	be	dry	and
miserly.	 Attention	 is	 not	 the	 form	 of	 awareness	 used	 to	 recognize	 awake
awareness.	 You	 must	 continue	 to	 discover	 awake	 awareness	 and	 effortless
mindfulness	within	the	interconnected	field	of	open-hearted	awareness.

The	key	 transition	 from	using	attention	 to	using	 local	awareness	 is	 to	have
local	awareness	step	out	of	the	thought-based,	ego-centered	small	mind.	If	local
awareness	has	not	unhooked	or	detached	from	thought,	you	will	be	trying	to	be
mindful	 from	the	everyday	mind	by	using	attention,	which	will	keep	you	from
knowing	 awake	 awareness.	 The	 point	 here	 is	 to	 stress	 that	 attention	 overload
happens	when	 you	 use	 attention	 as	 the	 only	 form	 of	 awareness.	Many	 people
who	 have	 been	 diagnosed	 with	 attention	 deficit	 disorder	 (ADD)	 have	 been
helped	by	effortless	mindfulness.	You	will	get	a	 feel	 for	 the	distinct	difference
between	 attention	 concentrating	 from	 small	 mind	 and	 the	 relief	 of	 local
awareness	focusing	from	awake	awareness.

GOLDILOCKS:	PORRIDGE	TOO	COLD,	PORRIDGE	TOO	HOT

As	 I	mentioned	 earlier	 using	my	 colleague	Anna-Lisa	Adelberg’s	metaphor,	 if
you’re	 too	 far	 back	 into	 awake	 awareness	 or	 conceptual	 mind,	 then	 people
experience	 you	 as	 “porridge	 too	 cold.”	 If	 you	 are	 too	 much	 in	 subtle	 body
awareness	or	emotionally	enmeshed	with	your	own	parts	or	with	other	people’s
feelings,	 then	people	 experience	you	 as	 “porridge	 too	hot.”	 If	 you	 are	 relating
and	 creating	 from	effortless	 heart-mindfulness	 and	Self-leadership,	 people	will
exclaim,	“Porridge	just	right!”



SCARECROW	AWAKENING

This	one	 is	 the	first	 in	a	series	of	The	Wizard	of	Oz	metaphors.	 In	 this	 type	of
scarecrow	awakening,	we	try	to	awaken	through	reading	a	lot	of	spiritual	books
or	understanding	who	we	are	through	intellectual	concepts.	Our	conceptual	mind
is	about	as	useful	as	a	head	filled	with	straw	when	it	comes	to	knowing	awake
awareness	as	our	 true	nature.	We	need	 to	shift	 into	an	awake	awareness–based
knowing.

TIN	MAN	AWAKENING

Here	 we	 have	 a	 strong	 experience	 of	 emptiness	 and	 no-self,	 but	 there	 is	 not
enough	heart	yet.	Here	we’ve	awakened	from	mind,	body,	and	emotion	but	not
yet	into	open-hearted	awareness.	Keep	following	the	yellow	brick	road!

COWARDLY	LION	AWAKENING

In	this	one,	we’re	learning	to	go	beyond	the	doer,	opening	to	a	new	vulnerability,
a	 new	 avenue	 for	 action	 to	 come	 through.	 But	we	 can	 get	 stuck	with	 not	 yet
having	 developed	 the	 courage	 of	 open-hearted	 awareness	 to	 be	 and	 do	 in	 the
world.	People	at	 this	stage	sometimes	become	aggressive	or	have	a	know-it-all
persona,	 like	 the	 Cowardly	 Lion	 pompously	 chasing	 Toto,	 but	 that	 action	 is
coming	 from	defensiveness,	 pride,	 or	 fear.	Many	people	 have	 reported	 the	 big
shift	 in	doing	social	 justice	work	from	the	motivation	of	 love	and	compassion,
rather	than	fear	and	anger.

DOROTHY	AWAKENING

Here	we	get	stuck	in	perpetual	seeking,	going	around	and	around	on	the	yellow
brick	road,	trying	to	get	to	freedom	without	realizing	that	we	have	been	home	all
along.

TOTO	AWAKENING

The	trap	here	is	feeling	like	you	are	only	a	small	animal	rather	than	experiencing
your	 vast,	 interconnected	 Self.	 Try	 saying	 “total	 awakening”	 with	 a	 Castilian
Spanish	accent.	(It	sounds	like	a	slight	lisp	to	English-speaking	ears.)	Don’t	miss



Toto	awakening	by	thinking	that	anything	is	left	out	or	separate.	Does	a	dog,	like
Toto,	have	Buddha	nature?	Dog-Zen	says	yes.	(Cow-Zen	says	mu.)

THE	RUBY	SLIPPERS	OF	EFFORTLESS	MINDFULNESS

The	 trap	 here	 is	 getting	 discouraged	 and	 feeling	 lost	 and	 overwhelmed	 by	 the
journey.	 Remember	 the	 good	 witch	 Glinda’s	 advice	 about	 the	 ruby	 slippers:
you’ve	had	the	power	to	return	home	all	along.

INTELLECTUALIZATION

My	 teacher	 Tulku	 Urgyen	 Rinpoche	 has	 said	 about	 realization	 of	 your	 true
nature	 that	 “the	 great	 danger	 is	 when	 one	 just	 leaves	 it	 as	 intellectual
understanding.”1	 Awakening	 is	 grounded	 in	 experiencing	 nonconceptual
awareness.	Any	 fixed	 ideas	or	beliefs	 that	we	create	about	awakening,	 that	we
become	 fascinated	 with,	 can	 bring	 us	 back	 to	 a	 small	 self	 and	 small	 mind.
Instead,	we	 can	 choose	 to	 stay	with	 the	 natural	 unfolding,	which	will	 lead	 us
through	the	stage	of	not-knowing	into	a	new	spontaneous	heart-knowing.

BEING	UNDER	THE	INFLUENCE	OF	THE	ULTIMATE

This	is	 the	feeling	that	the	ultimate	dimension	is	the	only	thing	that	is	real	and
everything	 else	 is	 illusion.	 My	 understanding	 of	 nonduality	 is	 that	 on	 the
ultimate	 level,	 appearances	 are	 unreal,	 but	 on	 the	 relative	 level,	 they	 are
appearing.	The	relative	is	made	of	the	ultimate	like	a	wave	is	made	of	the	ocean.
Nonduality	is	not	the	exclusive	domain	of	the	ultimate	reality.	The	relative	is	a
precious	 expression	 of	 the	 ultimate.	 Our	 being	 is	 both	 transcendent	 and
immanent.

ONENESS	ONLY

When	 people	 are	 released	 from	 dualistic	 perception,	 they	 often	 describe	 the
initial	experience	as	“oneness.”	The	experience	of	oneness	can	occur	when	there
is	 a	 dropping	 of	 ego-identification,	 such	 as	 during	 a	 peak	 experience,	 where
there	 is	 a	 feeling	 of	 “I	 am	 one	 with	 everything.”	 The	 term	 nondual	 does	 not
mean	oneness.	The	Sanskrit	word	for	nonduality,	advaita,	was	used	for	a	reason:



it	means	“not	two.”	The	ancient	mystics	had	other	words	for	oneness	that	could
have	been	used,	but	 they	chose	advaita.	Nondual	means	both/and,	 inseparable,
all-at-once,	and	simultaneous:	not	one,	not	two,	not	several,	not	empty,	but	all	of
these.

SAUNA	MEDITATION	STATE

I	call	getting	caught	in	a	calm,	relaxed,	sleeplike	state	that	is	comfortably	numb
“sauna	meditation.”	Tsoknyi	Rinpoche	refers	to	this	as	“stupid	meditation.”2	The
goal	of	meditation	is	not	to	stop	thoughts	or	just	be	very	relaxed.	This	can	be	an
important	first	step	to	soothe	the	animal	of	our	mind	and	body,	but	awakening	is
alert,	interconnected,	creative,	and	compassionate.

AVOIDING	THE	VOID

The	 small	 mind	 naturally	 fears	 the	 unknown.	 It	 spends	 time	 and	 energy
projecting	negative	beliefs	onto	 the	emptiness	of	no	 thought	and	no	action	and
defending	against	the	void	and	egolessness.	It	fears	losing	control	and	dying.	But
as	we	 transition	 out	 of	 small	 self,	 we	 discover	 that	 emptiness,	 space,	 and	 the
unknown	 are	 the	 boundless	 ground	 of	 our	 being,	 which	 is	 safe	 and	 includes
everything.

LOOKING	BUT	NOT	LEAPING

Some	 people	 are	 fascinated	with	 the	 ultimate	 but	 never	 go	 beyond	meditation
practices	that	develop	the	relative	level.	This	can	be	more	of	a	teacher	problem
than	a	student	problem,	as	many	students	are	eager	to	experience	ultimate	reality.
It’s	helpful	for	students	to	have	a	map	to	know	how	to	let	go	and	what	to	go	let
go	into.	But	eventually	we	have	to	go	beyond	everything	we’ve	been	taught	and
discover	our	inner	teachers.	Truly	knowing	if	we’re	in	the	right	place	can	only	be
known	by	the	new	knowing	that	arises	after	you	make	the	leap.

LOVING	THE	DESCRIPTION	BUT	NOT	TAKING	THE	PRESCRIPTION

Many	people	love	the	beautiful	words	in	books,	poetry,	and	teachings	but	have
not	 found	 the	 directions,	 prescriptions,	 courage,	 curiosity,	 beginner’s	mind,	 or



commitment	 that	are	necessary	 for	 the	 journey.	 It	 is	one	 thing	 to	 read	 the	map
and	another	to	experience	the	territory.

SPIRITUAL	BYPASS

In	Toward	a	Psychology	of	Awakening,	 John	Welwood	points	out	 this	potential
trap:	“There	is	often	a	tendency	to	use	spiritual	practice	to	try	to	rise	above	our
emotional	and	personal	 issues—all	 those	messy,	unresolved	matters	 that	weigh
us	 down.	 I	 call	 this	 tendency	 to	 avoid	 or	 prematurely	 transcend	 basic	 human
needs,	feelings,	and	developmental	tasks	spiritual	bypassing.”3

PSYCHOLOGICAL	UNDERPASS

Psychological	underpass	is	the	term	I	use	to	describe	doing	psychotherapy	from
an	ego-identity,	using	only	a	bio-psycho-social	map	and	tools.	Important	healing
and	personal	growth	can	happen	with	conventional	psychotherapy,	but	only	to	a
certain	level	without	discovering	our	true	nature:	no-self	Self.

PARKING	AT	THE	GRAND	CANYON

This	 is	 like	 having	 an	 initial	 amazing,	 vast,	 opening	 experience	 of	 your	 true
nature	but	then	stopping	partway	on	your	journey	and	setting	up	camp.

NOTHING	TO	DO/DOING	NOTHING

Because	 awake	 awareness	 is	 self-maintaining	 and	 self-liberating	without	 “me”
doing	anything,	we	can	believe	 that	 there	 is	no	need	 to	 take	any	action	on	any
level.	Although	 the	 small,	 initial	 effort	 of	 letting	go,	 stopping,	 or	 surrendering
leads	us	beyond	the	initial	doer,	in	reality,	awake	awareness	does	have	intention
and	the	ability	to	create	and	relate	from	Self-leadership.

STOPPING	AT	NOT-KNOWING

Not-knowing	 is	 the	 transition	 between	 conceptual	 knowing	 and	 awake
awareness.	 If	 you	 stop	 in	 “don’t-know	mind,”	which	 is	 the	beginning	 stage	of
true	knowing,	 then	you	are	 free	of	 the	old	 information	processor	 in	your	head,



but	you	have	not	yet	rewired	your	system	to	hook	up	with	awake	awareness	that
is	the	new	nonconceptual	operating	system.	It	is	a	relief	when	we	step	out	of	the
small	mind,	but	we	can	get	stuck	in	a	meditative	gap	of	not-knowing,	which	can
lead	to	a	couch	potato	phase.	Instead,	we	need	to	keep	moving,	first	from	mental
knowing	into	not-knowing,	then	into	nonconceptual	awake	awareness,	then	to	a
not-knowing	that	knows,	and	finally	to	open-hearted	awareness.

NOBODY	HOME

After	 the	 experience	 of	 ego-identification	 falls	 away,	 the	 opposite	 belief	 can
replace	 it:	 “There	 is	 nobody	here.”	Often	 people	 speaking	 from	 this	 view	will
say	something	like,	“There	is	no	one	named	Tom	here,	and	I	see	there	never	was.
I	 feel	 free,	 though	 my	 partner	 says	 I’m	 disconnected.”	 This	 is	 a	 transitional
phase	 and	 is	 experienced	 in	 such	 a	 way	 because	 we	 started	 from	 a	 strong
experience	of	ego	as	“this	is	who	I	am,”	so	when	ego-identification	drops	away,
it	can	feel	as	if	no	one	is	here	anymore.	In	fact,	the	one	you	took	yourself	to	be	is
no	longer	experienced	and	is	no	longer	the	experiencer.	So	there	is	a	transition,
or	 a	 gap,	 of	 no-self,	 but	 then	 awake	 awareness	 becomes	 embodied	 and	 open-
hearted	 to	be	a	more	 intimate	human	being.	Our	ego	functions	and	personality
will	always	be	a	part	of	us	as	an	awake	human	being.

FUNDAMENTAL	FUNDAMENTALISM

People	 fall	 into	 this	 trap	 if	 they	 take	 initial	 awakening	 as	 a	 philosophy	 that	 is
either	 right	 or	wrong.	 In	 this	 trap,	 awakening	 and	 its	 insights	 get	 co-opted	 by
intellectual	ideas.	Awakening	can	be	made	into	a	spiritual	experience	that	“I”	am
having,	which	either	reinforces	the	ideas	that	this	“I”	had	before	or	creates	a	new
“right	 religion.”	Please	don’t	become	 too	 rigid	and	serious	or	 forget	 that	“fun”
cannot	be	taken	out	of	our	fundamental	nature!

ETHICAL	RELATIVITY

This	 is	 a	detour	 that	 happens	when	people	go	beyond	dualistic	perception	 and
say,	“Everything	is	relative,	an	illusion,	and	the	play	of	consciousness,	so	I	can
do	 whatever	 I	 want.”	 This	 is	 a	 common	 and	 potentially	 dangerous	 trap	 after
initial	head	awakening.	The	initial	awakening	out	of	categories	of	good	and	bad
and	 the	controlling	superego	 leads	 to	a	 freedom	from	the	sense	of	 internal	and



societal	“shoulds.”	This	can	be	greatly	beneficial	in	that	it	releases	us	from	binds
that	 hold	 the	 false	 identity	 together.	 However,	 it	 is	 possible	 to	 stop	 at	 the
“freedom	 from”	 small	 self	 stage	 without	 getting	 to	 the	 “freedom	 to”	 awake
awareness	stage.	If	we	stop	after	head	awakening,	it	can	lead	to	a	regression	to
an	adolescent	level	of	ethics	and	acting	out	on	impulses	related	to	sex,	money,	or
power,	as	we’ve	seen	with	some	spiritual	teachers.	In	this	way,	some	people	will
take	 initial	 awakening	 as	 a	 free	 pass	 to	 do	 whatever	 they	 want	 because
“everything	is	the	play	of	the	Divine.”

SPIRITUAL	ROBOT

The	feeling	of	being	not	only	disidentified	but	detached	from	all	emotions	and
preferences	can	lead	to	the	point	where,	when	you	are	asked,	“What	type	of	tea
would	you	like?”	you	respond,	“All	tea	is	the	same.”	The	goal	is	not	to	transcend
emotions,	desires,	and	preferences	but	to	shift	out	of	the	suffering	caused	by	ego-
identification	and	into	living	from	an	interconnected,	joyful,	compassionate,	and
awake	human	life.

EARNING	AWAKENING

When	we	think	we	have	to	earn	awakening,	we	get	caught	in	a	kind	of	striving
and	 seeking,	 as	 if	 awakening	 is	 something	we	have	 to	 be	worthy	 of	 or	 that	 is
dependent	 on	 effort,	works,	 or	 skill.	 In	 some	ways,	 the	 first	 awakening	 is	 the
realization	that	we	are	already	essentially	awake.

STUCK	IN	THE	STUDENT	ROLE

If	 the	role	of	a	 teacher	 is	 to	 introduce	students	 to	 their	own	inner	 teacher,	 then
the	student’s	role	is	to	meet	their	inner	teacher.	We	might	get	stuck	by	projecting
our	 inner	 teachers	onto	an	outer	 teacher.	Some	students	 remain	 in	 the	nest	 too
long	 or	 remain	 in	 the	 dependent	 student	 role	 of	 following	 directions	 without
embodying	the	teachings.	Some	students	might	idealize	teachers	and	remain	in	a
dependent	role,	doubting	that	 they	themselves	can	ever	awaken.	Other	students
are	continually	spirituality	shopping	and	going	to	different	teachers	as	a	way	of
entertainment	 and	 avoidance	 of	 facing	 the	 meeting	 of	 repressed	 parts	 as
necessary	for	spiritual	growth.



ONE	AND	DONE

Some	 students	 have	 a	 belief	 that	 once	 they’ve	 had	 the	 initial	 experience	 of
awakening	 from	 dualistic	 mind,	 they’ve	 arrived,	 and	 that	 they’ll	 stay	 there,
without	going	back	to	other	ways	of	being	they	are	more	used	to.	Instead,	a	shift
into	embodied	awakening	requires	time	for	unfolding	and	rewiring	to	be	able	to
live	from	effortless	heart-mindfulness.

NIHILISM	OR	ETERNALISM

Both	 of	 these	 are	 extremes.	 Nihilism	 is	 the	 view	 that	 because	 everything	 is
empty,	 everything	 is	meaningless.	 Eternalism	 is	 the	 view	 that	 there	 is	 a	 thing
called	“me”	that	will	exist	as	it	is	forever.	Being	empty	of	a	separate	self	means
that	we	are	interconnected	to	life.	Remember,	emptiness	means	interconnection.

TRYING	TO	KILL	THE	EGO	THAT	DOESN’T	EXIST

This	is	a	way	of	using	aggression,	will,	effort,	and	control	to	try	to	get	rid	of	or
subdue	 the	 ego	 identity.	 However,	 the	 ego	 is	 not	 an	 entity	 that	 exists;	 it	 is	 a
mental	and	emotional	pattern.	Fighting	against	the	pattern	reinforces	its	strength!
Once	 we	 discover	 awake	 awareness	 as	 the	 foundation	 of	 who	 we	 are,	 ego
functions	can	relax	and	semi-retire	from	trying	to	do	a	second	job	of	ego	identity.

AWAKENING	AS	ONE-STOP	SHOPPING

Awakening	does	not	mean	that	all	of	your	human	developmental	areas	will	go	to
an	 elevated	 level	 immediately.	 For	 example,	 discovering	 the	wisdom	of	 open-
hearted	awareness	does	not	mean	you	will	immediately	be	able	to	win	all	Trivial
Pursuit	games,	play	concert	piano,	or	have	excellent	communication	skills	with
loved	 ones	 or	 people	 at	 work.	 In	 Zen,	 there	 is	 a	 saying:	 “Enlightenment	 is
acceptance	of	imperfection.”	We	need	to	continue	to	both	wake	up	and	grow	up.

WHITEWASHING	OR	WEARING	ROSE-COLORED	GLASSES

When	 we	 do	 this,	 we	 are	 acting	 as	 if	 the	 relative	 world	 is	 “rosy,”	 or	 we	 are
allowing	ourselves	to	be	blind	to	human	suffering.	This	distancing	comes	from
false	 beliefs	 that	 awakening	means	 that	we	will	 never	 have	 any	 problems	 and



that	we	will	be	able	to	escape	from	the	human	condition.	Instead,	we	are	able	to
experience	 both	 pleasant	 and	 unpleasant	 feelings	 and	 respond	 more
courageously	to	inner	and	outer	pain.

PSYCHIC	DIMENSION	DETOUR

It	is	not	unusual	to	reach	a	stage	of	awakening	in	which	you	become	extremely
sensitive,	on	a	subtle	or	psychic	level	of	perception,	to	other	people’s	emotional
states	 or	 subtle	 aspects	 of	 your	 surrounding	 environment.	 This	 perceptual
opening	or	overload	will	usually	calm	down	on	its	own	after	a	while,	but	it	can
be	helpful	to	get	feedback	from	others	who	have	experienced	this	to	realize	that
though	you’re	“out	of	your	(small)	mind,”	you	haven’t	gone	crazy!

There	 are	 two	 traps	 here:	 First,	 you	 might	 become	 fascinated	 with	 these
psychic	perceptions	or	powers,	which	are	not	necessary	for	awakening,	and	 let
them	 sidetrack	 you	 via	 distraction	 and	 dispersed	 attention.	 Second,	 you	might
get	scared	or	overwhelmed	because	the	new	feelings	or	perceptions	are	unknown
or	intense,	and	you	start	to	shut	down.	It	can	all	feel	like	too	much	information.
The	way	through	is	to	open	up	to	the	awake	awareness	dimension	inside	and	all
around	so	that	you	can	remain	sensitive	while	allowing	the	intelligence	of	awake
awareness	to	integrate	all	of	the	input,	new	sensitivity,	and	experiences	without
overwhelm.

CONEY	ISLAND	HOT	DOG	OF	SPIRITUAL	PRIDE

We	may	 have	 the	 belief	 that	 the	 ego	 identity	will	wake	 up	 or	 that	 the	 person
“me”	 is	 awake.	 Arrogance	 or	 pride	 can	 show	 up	 in	 the	 spiritual	 path	 with
thoughts	or	beliefs	of	specialness	such	as,	“I	am	one	with	everything,	but	others
are	not,”	or	“I	am	an	awake	butterfly,	and	others	are	asleep	caterpillars.”	In	truth,
I	am	unique	like	everyone	else,	and	awakeness	is	equally	within	each	of	us,	as
each	of	us,	whether	we	know	it	or	not.	Buddha	supposedly	said	upon	realization,
“I	and	all	beings	have	awakened.”

SPIRITUAL	SUPEREGO

This	is	a	harsh	inner	critic,	an	aspect	of	the	ego-self	that	remains	dominant	and
subtly	drives	you	to	renunciation,	self-denial,	or	judgment	of	yourself	or	others
around	“spiritual”	beliefs,	ideas,	or	right	and	wrong	actions.	This	is	a	protective



part	 that	 is	 trying	to	help,	and	it	 is	best	met	with	listening	and	love	rather	than
judging	the	judger.

RUBBER	BAND	EFFECT,	OR	GETTING	IT/LOSING	IT

This	can	be	a	 typical	experience	during	 the	 initial	 stage	of	having	glimpses	of
awakening.	The	inertia	of	our	habits	of	mind	has	a	power	that	draws	us	back	to
the	 magnetic	 ego-center.	 While	 our	 awakening	 path	 unfolds,	 as	 long	 as	 the
unconditioned	 spacious	 awareness	 remains	 the	 only	 alternative	 to	 ego-identity,
then	we	will	have	to	come	back	to	the	ego	in	order	to	function.	Since	we	can’t
live	 as	 a	 human	 being	 while	 remaining	 in	 pure	 awake	 awareness	 only,	 we’ll
experience	“losing	it”	and	having	to	return	to	ego	identity	in	order	to	function,
until	form	and	formlessness	are	discovered	to	not	be	separate.



S
Acknowledgments

o	many	people	have	touched	my	life	and	influenced	me	in	ways	that	I
can	never	fully	express.	I	am	so	grateful	for	each	breath	in	my	precious	human
life.	 I	 want	 to	 thank	 all	 the	 people	 I	 have	 come	 in	 contact	 with,	 especially
students	and	clients,	who	have	given	me	more	than	they	can	imagine.

I’d	 like	 to	 thank	 my	 three	 amazing	 primary	 editors,	 Alice	 Peck,	 Olivia
Frazao,	and	Elah	Schild,	 for	 their	 tremendous	help	and	support.	 I	 also	want	 to
acknowledge	my	consulting	editor,	Kelly	Notaras,	as	well	as	Jennifer	Brown	and
the	amazing	team	at	Sounds	True.

To	my	colleagues	and	fellow	teachers	Scott	McBride,	Anna-Lisa	Adelberg,
Adyashanti,	 Richard	 Schwartz,	 Father	 Thomas	Keating,	 Chad	 Cascarilla,	 Tara
Brach,	 Shinzen	 Young,	 Richard	 Miller,	 Anam	 Thubten,	 Lama	 Surya	 Das,
Stephan	Bodian,	Mirabai	Starr,	Kurt	Johnson,	Daniel	Siegel,	and	my	cat	Duffy.

To	 my	 teachers,	 whose	 guidance	 and	 open-hearted	 discussions	 have
nourished	 me	 and	 brought	 me	 great	 joy:	 Godwin	 Samararatne,	 Dhammasiri,
Khenchen	 Thrangu	 Rinpoche,	 Dzogchen	 Ponlop	 Rinpoche,	 Chogyal	 Namkhai
Norbu,	Traleg	Rinpoche,	Daniel	Brown,	Hameed	Ali,	Anam	Thubten,	Mingyur
Rinpoche,	and	Tsoknyi	Rinpoche.

To	my	board	members	and	team	at	the	Open-Hearted	Awareness	Institute.	I
am	not	able	to	thank	everyone	who	has	helped	me	by	name,	but	know	that	your
support	has	helped	this	book	become	available	to	many	people.

To	 all	my	 family	 and	 friends,	 especially	my	 loving	wife,	 Paige,	who	 have
supported	me	through	the	writing	of	this	book	and	beyond.



Notes

CHAPTER	1
1. Mihaly	Csikszentmihalyi,	“Flow,	the	Secret	to	Happiness,”	February

2004,	TED	video,	18:56,
ted.com/talks/mihaly_csikszentmihalyi_on_flow?language=en.

CHAPTER	2
1. Tulku	Urgyen	Rinpoche,	Rainbow	Painting:	A	Collection	of
Miscellaneous	Aspects	of	Development	and	Completion,	trans.	Erik	Pema
Kunsang	(Hong	Kong:	Ranjung	Yeshe	Publications,	1995),	110.

2. Tulku	Urgyen	Rinpoche,	“The	Kind	of	Guru	I	Had,”	Lion’s	Roar:
Buddhist	Wisdom	for	Our	Time,	September	1,	2005,	lionsroar.com/the-
kind-of-guru-i-had/.

3. Jon	Kabat-Zinn,	Wherever	You	Go,	There	You	Are:	Mindfulness
Meditation	in	Everyday	Life	(New	York:	Hachette	Books,	2005),	4.

4. Merriam-Webster,	s.v.	“attention,”	accessed	August	22,	2018,	merriam-
webster.com/dictionary/attention.

5. William	James,	The	Principles	of	Psychology,	vol.	1	(Massachusetts:
Peter	Smith	Pub	Inc,	1979),	176.

6. Zoran	Josipovic	et	al.,	“Influence	of	Meditation	on	Anti-Correlated
Networks	in	the	Brain,”	Frontiers	in	Human	Neuroscience	5	(January
2011):	183,	doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2011.00183.

7. Zoran	Josipovic,	“Freedom	of	the	Mind,”	Frontiers	in	Psychology	4
(August	2013):	538,	doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00538.

8. Poppy	L.A.	Schoenberg	et	al.,	“Mapping	Complex	Mind	States:	EEG
Neural	Substrates	of	Meditative	Unified	Compassionate	Awareness,”
Consciousness	and	Cognition	57	(January	2018):	41–53,
doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2017.11.003.

9. Schoenberg,	“Mapping	Complex	Mind	States,”	43.

http://ted.com/talks/mihaly_csikszentmihalyi_on_flow?language=en
http://lionsroar.com/the-kind-of-guru-i-had/
http://merriam-webster.com/dictionary/attention
http://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2011.00183
http://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00538
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2017.11.003


CHAPTER	3
1. Dzogchen	Ponlop	Rinpoche,	Wild	Awakening:	The	Heart	of	Mahamudra
and	Dzogchen	(Boston:	Shambhala	Publications,	2003),	30–31.

2. Andrew	Olendzki,	“The	Fourth	Foundation	of	Mindfulness,”	Insight
Journal,	Barre	Center	for	Buddhist	Studies,	Spring	2004,
buddhistinquiry.org/article/the-fourth-foundation-of-mindfulness/.

3. Thich	Nhat	Hanh,	Interbeing	(Berkeley:	Parallax	Press,	1987),	4.

CHAPTER	5
1. Merriam-Webster,	s.v.	“attention,”	accessed	August	22,	2018,	merriam-

webster.com/dictionary/attention.
2. Daniel	J.	Siegel,	The	Mindful	Brain:	Reflection	and	Attunement	in	the
Cultivation	of	Well-Being	(New	York:	WW	Norton	&	Company,	2007).

3. Adyashanti,	The	Most	Important	Thing:	Discovering	Truth	at	the	Heart	of
Life	(Boulder,	CO:	Sounds	True,	2019),	113.

CHAPTER	6
1. “Cortical/Cerebral	Visual	Impairment,	Traumatic	Brain	Injury,	and

Neurological	Vision	Loss,”	American	Foundation	for	the	Blind,	accessed
August	5,	2018,	afb.org/info/living-with-vision-loss/eye-
conditions/cortical-visual-impairment-traumatic-brain-injury-and-
neurological-vision-loss/123.

2. Ken	McLeod,	Wake	Up	to	Your	Life:	Discovering	the	Buddhist	Path	of
Attention	(San	Francisco:	Harper,	2001),	223.

CHAPTER	7
1. Richard	Schwartz,	Internal	Family	Systems	Therapy	(New	York:	Guilford

Press,	1997),	82.
2. Daniel	J.	Siegel,	The	Developing	Mind:	How	Relationships	and	the	Brain
Interact	to	Shape	Who	We	Are,	2nd	ed.	(New	York:	Guilford	Press,	2015),
199.

3. Schwartz,	Internal	Family	Systems	Therapy,	106.

APPENDIX

http://buddhistinquiry.org/article/the-fourth-foundation-of-mindfulness/
http://merriam-webster.com/dictionary/attention
http://afb.org/info/living-with-vision-loss/eye-conditions/cortical-visual-impairment-traumatic-brain-injury-and-neurological-vision-loss/123


1. “Tulku	Urgyen	Rinpoche—Interview	for	Vajradhatu	Sun,	1985,”	We	Are
Perfect	Buddha	Mind	(blog),	translated	by	Erik	Pema	Kunsang,	October
29,	2009,	wearebuddhamind.blogspot.com/2009/10/tulku-urgyen-
rinpoche-interview-for.html.

2. Tsoknyi	Rinpoche,	“A	Very	Human	Condition	(Part	2	of	2),”	Pundarika
Foundation,	accessed	October	7,	2018,	tsoknyirinpoche.org/1439/a-very-
human-condition-part-two-of-two/.

3. John	Welwood,	Toward	a	Psychology	of	Awakening:	Buddhism,
Psychotherapy,	and	the	Path	of	Personal	and	Spiritual	Transformation
(Boston:	Shambhala	Publications,	2000),	12.

http://wearebuddhamind.blogspot.com/2009/10/tulku-urgyen-rinpoche-interview-for.html
http://tsoknyirinpoche.org/1439/a-very-human-condition-part-two-of-two/


List	of	Mindful	Glimpses

CHAPTER	1

Wordless	Awareness
Memory	Door
From	Your	Heart
Background	Awareness
Eyes	of	Awareness
The	Peace	Within
How	to	Do	Not-Doing
Relax	the	Problem	Solver

CHAPTER	2

Awake	Awareness	Knows	Without	Using	Thought	or	Attention

CHAPTER	3

The	Four	Postures	of	Dynamic	Stillness
Focusing	on	the	Breath	from	Within	the	Breath
Beyond	the	Meditator
Lovingkindness	and	Compassion	Are	Already	Here
Embodiment	Scan

CHAPTER	4

Experiencing	Attention
Experiencing	Local	Awareness
Effortless	Mindfulness	Pain-Relief	Method



CHAPTER	5

I	Am
Who	Is	Aware	Now?
Looking	from	Awareness
Knowing	from	Open-Hearted	Awareness

CHAPTER	6

Awareness	Following	the	Breath	Home
Awareness	of	Space
Awareness	of	Awareness
The	You-Turn
Mind,	the	Gap
Awareness	Yoga
Infinite	No-Self
Effortless	Focus
Panoramic	Awareness
Awake	Awareness-Energy	Embodied
The	Now
Emotions	as	Awareness-Energy
Drop	from	Head	to	Heart-Mind
“Om	Sweet	Home”	in	Your	Heart
Knowing	from	Heart-Mind
Cave	of	the	Heart

CHAPTER	7

Know	Your	Self

CHAPTER	8

Peer	Inquiry	Practice	1
Peer	Inquiry	Practice	2
Peer	Inquiry	Practice	3
Peer	Inquiry	Practice	4
Peer	Inquiry	Practice	5



Peer	Inquiry	Practice	6



Index

abiding,	131,	152,	153–54
Adelberg,	Anna-Lisa,	107,	173
advaita	(not	two),	39,	175
Adyashanti,	89,	117
afflictive	consciousness,	81
“aha!”	moments,	42,	151,	168
alpha	waves,	41
anxiety	dreams,	114
attention,	39–41,	85,	86
attention	deficit	disorder	(ADD),	172
attention	overload,	172
on	breath,	53,	56–58,	94,	165
deliberate	mindfulness	and,	16,	33,	94
Experiencing	Attention	(Mindful	Glimpse),	70
focused	attention	(FA),	39–41
maintaining,	33
vs.	awake	awareness,	100
vs.	local	awareness,	70,	71

attunement,	87
awake	awareness,	16–22,	85,	87–88
as	already	present,	4–5,	18,	19,	48,	49,	152
alternate	names	for,	16
attributes	and	experiences	of,	34
Awake	Awareness	Knows	Without	Using	Thought	or	Attention	(Mindful

Glimpse),	34
as	aware	of	itself	(Foundation	Two),	49,	102–7
awareness	of	(Foundation	One),	48–49,	94–109



definition	of,	16
direct	experience	and,	20–21
as	formless,	50
How	to	Do	Not-Doing	(Mindful	Glimpse),	24
identity	and,	17,	21,	45–46,	49
intelligence	of,	35,	45,	48–49,	68,	88,	90,	108
interconnectedness	of,	50
introduction	to,	16–19
local	awareness,	46–47,	48–49,	52
as	natural	awareness,	88
as	naturally	compassionate,	32
open	mind	and	heart	connection,	19,	51–52
as	“ordinary	mind,”	21
qualities	of,	16–17,	103,	105
reasons	we	haven’t	discovered	yet,	19–22
remaining	awake,	151–64
shifting	into,	16,	18–19,	24,	28,	42,	48,	53,	166
“So	close	you	can’t	see	it,”	20
“So	good	you	can’t	accept	it,”	21
“So	simple	you	can’t	believe	it,”	21
“So	subtle	you	can’t	understand	it,”	20–21
as	source	of	mind,	19,	20,	21
vs.	attention	and	consciousness,	100

awake	awareness-energy,	50–51,	85,	89–90
awareness	from	(Foundation	Three),	50–51,	107–13

awake	awareness-energy	embodied	(Foundation	Four),	18,	51,	113–21
Mindful	Glimpse,	116–17
practices	for,	113–21

awakening,	2,	22–23,	43–63,	151–64
abiding	in,	152
as	already	here	and	available,	4–5,	168
definition	of,	22
dos	and	don’ts	of,	154–58
glimpses,	43–63,	165–68
as	goal	of	mindfulness	practices,	29
into	Self-leadership,	152–54
in	midst	of	everyday	life,	4–5,	42



as	next	stage	of	human	development,	4–5,	22–23
peer	inquiries,	160–64
positive	feedback	loop	for,	138
remaining	awake,	151–64
routes	to,	22–23
as	shift	of	view,	152
shifting	into	Self,	151–52
Sutra	Mahamudra	and,	3–4
unfolding	of,	152,	160,	174
wake	up,	wake	into,	wake	out,	23
Wizard	of	Oz	metaphors,	173–74

awareness-energy,	50–51,	89–90
awake	awareness-energy	embodied,	51,	113–21
paradox	of,	115–16

awareness	of	awake	awareness	(Foundation	One),	48–49
Mindful	Glimpse,	98–100
practices	for,	94–102

Awareness	Yoga	(Mindful	Glimpse),	105–6

Background	Awareness	(Mindful	Glimpse),	18
backward	step,	taking,	46
be	here	now,	61
beginner’s	mind,	6,	23
beta	waves,	41–42
Beyond	the	Meditator	(Mindful	Glimpse),	58–59
bliss,	60,	68,	106,	115,	122
blissed	in	(trap),	169–70
emptiness-bliss,	115

bodhicitta,	123
body,	51
body	scan	(Mindful	Glimpse),	61–63
interconnection	of,	114
mindfulness	of,	47
See	also	embodiment

bored	back	to	the	mind	(trap),	170–71
brain,	40–42,	82
brain	waves,	41–42



EEGs,	41–42
functional	magnetic	resonance	imaging	(fMRI),	40
networks	in,	40–41,	139
scans,	40
vision	centers	in,	96

breakthrough,	23
breath
attention	on,	53,	56–58,	94,	165
Awareness	Following	the	Breath	Home	(Mindful	Glimpse),	95–96
Focusing	on	the	Breath	from	Within	the	Breath	(Mindful	Glimpse),	56–58

Buddhism,	3–4,	44–45
See	also	specific	types	of	Buddhism,	e.g.,	Theravada	Buddhism,	Tibetan

Buddhism,	Zen	Buddhism

calm,	29
awake	awareness	as,	34
effortless	mindfulness	experienced	as,	30
focused	attention	and,	41
techniques	for,	53

calm	abiding	(shamatha),	39
Cave	of	the	Heart	(Mindful	Glimpse),	127–29
choiceless	awareness,	50
clarity,	1–2,	4,	13,	15,	16,	30,	34
Mindful	Glimpses	and,	11

cognitive	overpass,	142,	143
compassion,	4,	23,	43,	168
awake	awareness	and,	17,	18
Lovingkindness	and	Compassion	Are	Already	Here	(Mindful	Glimpse),	59–

61
consciousness,	77–85
afflictive	consciousness,	81
awake	awareness	and,	17
contents	of,	observing,	47–48,	87
contents	of,	vs.	context,	37,	48
lenses	of,	77,	78
shift	in,	9,	11
three	lenses	of,	77–85



types	of,	17,	78–79
understanding,	79
vs.	awake	awareness,	100
See	also	hypotheses

creativity,	4,	9,	12,	23,	41–42
Csikszentmihalyi,	Mihaly,	15

Dalai	Lama,	28
deliberate	mindfulness,	3,	16,	28–38
attention	and,	33
breath	and,	53,	56–58,	165
compared	with	effortless	mindfulness,	29–33,	84–85
dynamic	stillness,	55–56
Four	Foundations	of,	47
physical	posture	and,	55
starting	meditation	training	with,	53
transitioning	to	effortless	mindfulness	from,	53–63,	88
two	styles	of	practice,	39
types	of	awareness,	85

delta	waves,	41
direct	experience,	20–21,	50,	79,	101,	122
Mindful	Glimpses	as,	11,	12

direct	knowing,	21,	50,	52,	54,	71
direct	path	(essence)	traditions,	3,	28
doorways,	52–53
inner	and	outer,	52–53
Memory	Door	(Mindful	Glimpse),	13–14

doubt,	24
Drop	from	Head	to	Heart-Mind	(Mindful	Glimpse),	122–23
dukkha	(suffering),	79
dynamic	stillness,	55–56
Dzogchen	Ponlop	Rinpoche,	28,	44–45

ecstasy,	15
EEGs	(electroencephalograms),	41–42
effortless	effort	(wei	wu	wei),	14–15
Effortless	Focus	(Mindful	Glimpse),	109–11



effortless	heart	mindfulness,	18
effortless	mindfulness
as	already	present,	12–13,	19
alternate	terms	or	names	for,	14–15
author’s	early	experiences	with,	1–2
author’s	introduction	to,	27–29
awake	awareness	and,	16–19
benefits	of,	4–5,	29
brain	waves	during,	42
compared	with	deliberate	mindfulness,	29–33,	84–85
as	compatible	with	active,	engaged	life,	14–15
definition	of,	31
descriptions	of,	9–11,	12–13,	19,	28
direct	access	to,	28–29
effortless,	meaning	in,	30
Five	Foundations	of,	5,	47–52,	93–129
as	flow	state,	14–16,	114,	115–16
freedom	and	non-dependence	of,	13
intuitive	practice	of,	12–13
as	next	stage	of	human	development,	4–5
as	next	stage	of	mindfulness,	9–26
as	nondual	mindfulness,	40
obstacles,	traps,	and	points	of	difficulty,	24,	169–82
research	in,	39–41
transitioning	to,	from	deliberate	mindfulness,	53–63
types	of	awareness,	85
as	unique	form	of	mindfulness,	3–4
See	also	Five	Foundations	of	effortless	mindfulness;	pain	relief

Effortless	Mindfulness	Based	Therapy	(EMBT),	137,	139
effortlessness,	14–15
moving	from	effort	to,	153–54

ego
ego	identity,	86,	154,	159,	176,	177–78
ego	managers,	159–60
ego	personality	self,	137
observing	ego,	87
spiritual	superego	(trap),	181–82



trying	to	kill	(trap),	180
eight	types	of	awareness,	85–91
embodiment,	37
awake	awareness-energy	embodied,	18,	51,	108,	113–21
Awake	Awareness-Energy	Embodied	(Mindful	Glimpse),	116–17
Embodiment	Scan	(Mindful	Glimpse),	61–63
heart-mind	and,	81

emotions,	37,	120–21
awake	awareness	as	unharmed	by,	17
embracing,	46
Emotions	as	Awareness-Energy	(Mindful	Glimpse),	120–21
psychological	underpass,	142–44,	176
spiritual	bypass,	142,	176

emptiness,	78,	83–84
emptiness-appearance,	108
emptiness-bliss,	115
as	interconnectedness,	84
sunyata,	83
union	of	emptiness	and	appearance,	50

essence	traditions,	3
eternalism,	180
ethical	relativity,	178
exiles,	139
Experiencing	Attention	(Mindful	Glimpse),	70
Experiencing	Local	Awareness	(Mindful	Glimpse),	71
eyes
eye	of	the	heart,	123
Eyes	of	Awareness	(Mindful	Glimpse),	19
open-eyed	meditation,	96–97
visual	process,	96

feelings/sensations,	mindfulness	of,	47
firefighters,	139,	141
Five	Foundations	of	effortless	mindfulness,	5,	47–52,	93–129
One:	Awareness	of	awake	awareness,	48–49,	94–102
Two:	Awake	awareness	as	aware	of	itself,	49,	102–7
Three:	Awareness	from	awake	awareness-energy,	50–51,	107–13



Four:	Awake	awareness-energy	embodied,	51,	113–21
Five:	Open-hearted	awareness,	51–52,	121–29
inner	and	outer	doorways,	52–53
local	awareness	and,	53–54
practices	for,	93–129

flow,	1,	14–16,	23,	114,	115–16,	122,	168
awareness	of,	41
beneficial	effects	of,	9
seven	qualities	of,	15

Flow:	The	Psychology	of	Optimal	Experience	(Csikszentmihalyi),	15
fMRI	(functional	magnetic	resonance	imaging),	40
focus,	10,	15,	70
attention	and,	86
on	awareness,	37
Effortless	Focus	(Mindful	Glimpse),	109–11
Focusing	on	the	Breath	from	Within	the	Breath	(Mindful	Glimpse),	56–58
local	awareness	and,	49,	52
shift	in,	48
techniques	for,	53

focused	attention	(FA),	39–41
foundations	of	effortless	mindfulness.	See	Five	Foundations
Four	Foundations	of	Mindfulness,	39,	47
See	also	Five	Foundations	of	effortless	mindfulness

The	Four	Postures	of	Dynamic	Stillness	(Mindful	Glimpse),	55–56
freedom,	13,	23,	44,	63,	103
already	within	us,	28,	30,	79
Shift	into	Freedom	(Kelly),	5,	107

From	Your	Heart	(Mindful	Glimpse),	16
functional	magnetic	resonance	imaging	(fMRI),	40

gamma	waves,	42
giving	and	receiving	practice,	125–27
glimpses.	See	Mindful	Glimpses
goal-oriented	network,	40
Goldilocks/porridge	metaphor,	107,	173
Ground	of	Being,	51,	52,	79,	113–16,	121–22,	167
experience	described,	114–15



as	name	for	Self,	82
shift	into,	115

habits,	152,	160,	182
changing,	116,	153,	165
suffering	and,	79,	84

Hanh,	Thich	Nhat,	51
healing,	racial	collective,	5
heart
biological	heart,	128
Cave	of	the	Heart	(Mindful	Glimpse),	127–29
effortless	heart	mindfulness,	18
eye	of	the	heart,	123
From	Your	Heart	(Mindful	Glimpse),	16
heart	chakra,	128
heart-knowing,	136
Knowing	from	Open-Hearted	Awareness	(Mindful	Glimpse),	91
“Om	Sweet	Home”	in	Your	Heart	(Mindful	Glimpse),	124
open-hearted	awareness,	17,	18,	51–52,	91

heart-mind,	16,	51–52,	60,	122,	136
awareness	from,	90–91,	148
discovering,	80–82
Drop	from	Head	to	Heart-Mind	(Mindful	Glimpse),	122–23
as	embodied	awake-awareness,	81
intelligence	of,	123
Knowing	from	Heart-Mind	(Mindful	Glimpse),	125–27

human	development
awakening	as	next	stage	of,	22–23
effortless	mindfulness	as	next	stage	of,	4–5

hypotheses,	77–91
lens	of	the	mind	hypothesis,	79,	80–82
lens	of	the	Self	hypothesis,	80,	82–84
lens	of	awareness	hypothesis,	80,	84–85
lenses	of	consciousness,	77–85
suffering	and,	79–85
types	of	awareness,	85–91



I	am,	134
I	Am	(Mindful	Glimpse),	82

identity,	12–13,	17,	77,	78,	101,	133
awake	awareness	as	foundation	of,	17,	21,	45–46,	49
ego	identity,	86,	154,	159,	176,	177–78

imperfection,	acceptance	of,	180
individuality,	17
Infinite	No-Self	(Mindful	Glimpse),	106–7
inner	and	outer	doorways,	52–53
inner	child,	140,	141
insight,	17
insight	meditation	(vipassana),	5,	28,	30,	39
Satipatthana	Sutta,	47

intellectualization,	174
intelligence
of	awake	awareness,	35,	45,	48–49,	68,	88,	90,	108
of	heart-mind,	123
intuitive	intelligence,	17,	52

interbeing,	51
interconnectedness,	5,	22,	23,	32,	39
of	awake	awareness,	50,	51,	107
embodiment	and,	51,	63
emptiness	as,	84
experiencing,	2,	9,	44,	79,	108
of	local	awareness,	49
well-being	and	relief	of	suffering,	84

interdependent	arising,	50
Internal	Family	Systems	(IFS)	model,	137–38,	139,	141
intuitive	intelligence,	52
awake	awareness	and,	17

isolation,	38

James,	William,	33
Josipovic,	Zoran,	40
joy,	29,	37,	168
awake	awareness	and,	18,	44
connecting	with,	2



experiencing,	10
source	of,	13

Kabat-Zinn,	Jon,	31
knowing,	77,	78,	167
direct	knowing,	21,	50,	52,	54,	71
don’t	know	mind,	154,	177
From	Your	Heart	(Mindful	Glimpse),	16
heart-knowing,	136
from	heart-mind,	122,	125–27
Know	Your	Self	(Mindful	Glimpse),	148–49
Knowing	from	Heart-Mind	(Mindful	Glimpse),	125–27
Knowing	from	Open-Hearted	Awareness	(Mindful	Glimpse),	91
nonconceptual/not-knowing	that	knows,	49,	114
not-knowing,	153–54,	177
optimal	level	of,	17
thought-based,	19
without	using	thought	or	attention	(Mindful	Glimpse),	34

leadership.	See	Self-leadership
learning	styles,	52–53
lens	of	awareness	hypothesis,	80,	84–85
lens	of	the	mind	hypothesis,	79,	80–82
lens	of	the	self	hypothesis,	80,	82–84
letting	go,	18,	19,	31,	49,	54,	154
local	awareness,	46–47,	48–49,	53–54,	85,	88–89
and	awareness	of	awake	awareness,	94–96
Awareness	of	Space	(Mindful	Glimpse),	98
direct	knowing	through,	54
Experiencing	Local	Awareness	(Mindful	Glimpse),	71
focus	and,	49,	52
as	interconnected,	49
movement	of,	53–54,	57,	62,	71–72,	73,	94
pain	relief	and,	70–74
unhooking	from	thought,	48–49,	53–54,	56,	60,	61,	94,	99
uniting	with	spacious	awareness,	102–3
vs.	attention,	70,	71



you-turn	for,	100–102
Looking	from	Awareness	(Mindful	Glimpse),	85
love,	37,	168
capacity	for,	4
opening	to,	2
unconditional,	2,	23,	52,	167

lovingkindness,	32
Lovingkindness	and	Compassion	Are	Already	Here	(Mindful	Glimpse),	59–

61

Mahamudra	tradition,	28,	31,	118
one	taste,	90,	108
Sutra	Mahamudra,	3–4,	44–45,	48

Mahayana	Buddhism,	44
managers,	139,	140–41,	154–55
marigpa	(root	of	suffering),	28
meditation
Beyond	the	Meditator	(Mindful	Glimpse),	58–59
effortless	mindfulness	as	starting	place	for,	3
morning	meditation,	165–66
non-meditation,	14
sauna	meditation	state	(trap),	175
“stupid	meditation,”	175
therapist/teacher/guide	for,	77,	140–41,	153

Memory	Door	(Mindful	Glimpse),	13–14
mental	noting,	34
mind,	37,	45–46,	77,	78
beginner’s	mind,	6,	23
bored	back	to	the	mind	(trap),	170–71
clarity	of,	13,	16
cloud	of	the	mind,	45–46
don’t	know	mind,	154,	177
everyday	mind,	86,	171
heart-mind,	16,	51–52,	60
lens	of,	77,	78
lens	of	the	mind	hypothesis,	79
lens	of	the	mind,	solution,	79,	80–82



Mind,	the	Gap	(Mindful	Glimpse),	104–5
mindfulness	of,	47
openness	of,	10
optimal	mind,	16,	22,	134
ordinary	mind,	21
resting	in	natural	condition	(Six	Points	of	Tilopa),	118
rigpa	(nature	of	mind),	28
scared	back	to	the	mind	(trap),	171
second	opinion	from	(trap),	171–72
simultaneous	mind,	108
small	mind,	19,	30,	45,	79,	80–81
source	of	mind,	16,	19,	30,	79
subtle	mind,	87
two	levels	of,	37
See	also	heart-mind

mindful	awareness,	85,	87
Mindful	Glimpses,	5,	11–12,	43–63
describing	experience	with,	45–46
differences	from	guided	meditations,	93–94
individual	experience	of,	54
learn	to	return,	train	to	remain,	167
making	your	own	voice	recordings	of,	93,	129
open-eyed	practice	of,	96–97
practice	with,	43–63,	93–129
remembering	to	remember,	166–67
small	glimpses,	many	times,	11,	23,	165–68
use	of	local	awareness,	46–47

Mindful	Glimpses,	list	of,	189–90
Awake	Awareness-Energy	Embodied,	116–17
Awake	Awareness	Knows	Without	Using	Thought	or	Attention,	34–36
Awareness	Following	the	Breath	Home,	95–96
Awareness	of	Awareness,	98–100
Awareness	of	Space,	98
Awareness	Yoga,	105–6
Background	Awareness,	18
Beyond	the	Meditator,	58–59
Cave	of	the	Heart,	127–29



Drop	from	Head	to	Heart-Mind,	122–23
Effortless	Focus,	109–11
Effortless	Mindfulness	Pain-Relief	Method,	72
Embodiment	Scan,	61–63
Emotions	as	Awareness-Energy,	120–21
Experiencing	Attention,	70
Experiencing	Local	Awareness,	71
Eyes	of	Awareness,	19
Focusing	on	the	Breath	from	Within	the	Breath,	56–58
The	Four	Postures	of	Dynamic	Stillness,	55–56
From	Your	Heart,	16
How	to	Do	Not-Doing,	24
I	Am,	82
Infinite	No-Self,	106–7
Know	Your	Self,	148–49
Knowing	from	Heart-Mind,	125–27
Knowing	from	Open-Hearted	Awareness,	91
Looking	from	Awareness,	85
Lovingkindness	and	Compassion	Are	Already	Here,	59–61
Memory	Door,	13–14
Mind,	the	Gap,	104–5
The	Now,	117–20
“Om	Sweet	Home”	in	Your	Heart,	124
Panoramic	Awareness,	111–13
The	Peace	Within,	22
Peer	Inquiry	Practices,	161–63
Relax	the	Problem	Solver,	24–25
Who	Is	Aware	Now?,	84
Wordless	Awareness,	12
The	You-Turn,	102

mindful	move,	38
mindful	witness,	38–39,	50,	88,	106,	108
mindfulness,	9–42
benefits	of,	27
comparison	of	deliberate	and	effortless	mindfulness,	29–33,	84–85
definition	of,	27,	31
deliberate	mindfulness,	3,	16,	28,	29–33



effortless	mindfulness	as	unique	form,	3–4
Four	Foundations	of,	39,	47
Kabat-Zinn	on,	31
levels	of	mind	and,	37
next	stage	of,	9–26
nondual,	40
types	of,	28–30,	39
See	also	deliberate	mindfulness;	effortless	mindfulness

Mindfulness-Based	Stress	Reduction	(MBSR),	3,	61
morning	meditation,	165–66
motivation,	4,	9,	15,	164
movement
awareness-energy	and,	50–51
of	local	awareness,	53–54,	57,	62,	71–72,	73,	94
mindful	move,	38

natural	awareness,	16
nature,	true,	16,	33,	37,	79,	82,	134,	174
Nepal,	1,	27,	28–29
networks	in	brain	(neuronal	networks),	40–41,	139
nihilism,	180
nirvikalpa	samadhi,	127
no-self	Self,	82–84,	133–49
Cave	of	the	Heart	(Mindful	Glimpse),	127–29
experience	of	Self,	134–37
Infinite	No-Self	(Mindful	Glimpse),	106–7
knowing	and	liberating	parts,	139–42
lens	of	the	self,	solution	for,	80,	82–84
more	than	sum	of	parts,	137–38
moving	through	to	Self,	78,	80
no-self	witness,	50
psychological	underpass,	142–44,	176
relieving	burdens	of	parts,	139
Self-driving	vehicle,	147–48,	153
three	facets	of,	144–47
See	also	self/Self

non-meditation,	14



nondual	awareness	(NDA),	39–40
nondual	giving	and	receiving	practice,	125–27
nonduality,	3,	39–40,	106
advaita	(not	two),	39,	175
definition	of,	39
not	equal	to	oneness,	175
understanding	and	traps	of,	174–75

not-doing	(Mindful	Glimpse),	24
the	Now,	32–33,	117–20
The	Now	(Mindful	Glimpse),	117–20
Six	Points	of	Tilopa,	118

oculus	cordis	(eye	of	the	heart),	123
Olendzki,	Andrew,	47
“Om	Sweet	Home”	in	Your	Heart	(Mindful	Glimpse),	124
one	taste,	50,	90,	108
oneness,	90
oneness	only	(trap),	175

open-eyed	meditation,	96–97
open-hearted	awareness,	9,	13,	43,	44,	46,	51–52,	60,	85,	90–91,	168
awake	awareness	and,	17,	18
Drop	from	Head	to	Heart-Mind	(Mindful	Glimpse),	122–23
as	Foundation	Five,	51–52,	121–29
Knowing	from	(Mindful	Glimpse),	91
“Om	Sweet	Home”	in	Your	Heart	(Mindful	Glimpse),	124
practices	for,	121–29
Self	as,	134,	136
sense	functioning	with,	96

open	monitoring	(OM),	39,	40–41
openness/opening,	4,	32
operating	systems,	11,	83
of	awake	awareness,	153–54
awakening	and,	22
new,	upgraded,	22,	30,	49,	83,	153
of	open-hearted	awareness,	108

optimal	level	of	knowing,	17
optimal	mind,	16,	22,	134



pain,	66–70
as	a	signal,	67,	68
medical	treatment/evaluation	for,	67,	72
nature	of,	66–70
underlying	causes,	identifying,	67

pain	relief,	65–74
being	present	with	the	unpleasant,	68
Effortless	Mindfulness	Pain-Relief	Method	(Mindful	Glimpse),	72–74
effortless	mindfulness	practice	and,	68–74
local	awareness	as	key	to,	70–74
sciatic	pain,	68–69

Panoramic	Awareness	(Mindful	Glimpse),	111–13
parts	(subpersonalities),	135–42,	149
categories	of,	139
embracing,	149
exiles,	139
experiencing,	140–41
firefighters,	139
honoring	and	thanking,	142
imbalanced	Self-energy,	147–48
interacting	with	love,	141–42
knowing	and	liberating,	139–42
managers,	139,	140–41,	154–55
map	of,	137–38,	139
psychological	underpass,	142–44,	176
relieving	burdens	of,	139
Self-like	parts,	140–41,	143–44,	153

The	Peace	Within	(Mindful	Glimpse),	22
peer	inquiry	practices,	160–64
Mindful	Glimpses,	161–63

perception,	77,	78,	101
limited	form	of,	84–85

personality,	83
ego	personality,	137,	138
subpersonalities,	133–42

perspective
shifts	in,	103,	107–8,	136



suffering	and,	79
practicing	effortless	mindfulness.	See	Five	Foundations	of	effortless	mindfulness
prajna,	123
problem	solving,	141
Relax	the	Problem	Solver	(Mindful	Glimpse),	24–25

psychic	dimension	detour,	181
psychological	underpass,	142–44,	176
psychotherapy,	43,	137–39
Effortless	Mindfulness	Based	Therapy	(EMBT),	137,	139
Internal	Family	Systems	(IFS)	model,	137–38,	139,	141
mindfulness-based,	137

Rainbow	Painting,	28
Ramana	Maharshi,	128
reality,	9,	39–40,	133
awakening	and,	22
dimensions/levels	of,	39–40,	80,	133,	152
ultimate	reality,	39,	152

realization,	51,	89,	90,	103
recognition,	103
relativity	(trap),	178
Relax	the	Problem	Solver	(Mindful	Glimpse),	24–25
remaining	awake,	151–64
remembering,	33–34
remembering	to	remember,	166–67

rerouting	instructions.	See	traps,	detours,	and	rerouting
research	in	effortless	mindfulness,	39–41
rigpa	(nature	of	mind),	28
rose-colored	glasses,	180
rubber	band	effect,	182

safety,	4,	19,	61,	91,	154,	156
awake	awareness	and,	21,	34,	109,	113–15
of	cave	of	the	heart,	128–29
of	Ground	of	Being,	52

sati	(remembering),	33–34
Satipatthana	Sutta,	47



sauna	meditation	(trap),	175
Schoenberg,	Poppy	L.	A.,	41
Schwartz,	Richard,	137–38,	144,	146
Secret	of	the	Golden	Flower,	The,	46
self/Self,	77,	78,	82–84,	133–49
accessing,	as	ultimate	medicine,	135,	137–38,	140,	141
alternate	names	for,	13,	82
awake	awareness	and,	82,	147
awareness	of,	82,	134–35
capital-S	Self,	83,	133,	137
dimensions/parts	of,	135–36
ego	personality	self,	137
experience	of	Self,	134–37
facets	of,	144–47
heart-knowing	from,	136
I	Am	(Mindful	Glimpse),	82
identity	and,	12–13,	17,	21,	136
imbalanced	Self-energy,	147–48
Infinite	No-Self	(Mindful	Glimpse),	106–7
Know	Your	Self	(Mindful	Glimpse),	148–49
lens	of	the	Self,	80,	82–84
as	more	than	sum	of	parts,	137–38
no-self	Self,	82–84,	106–7,	133–49
as	open-hearted	awareness,	134,	136
parts	(subpersonalities),	135–42,	149
parts,	knowing	and	liberating,	139–42
parts,	map	of,	137–38,	139
perspective	of,	136
as	problem	solver,	24–25
Self-driving	vehicle,	147–48,	153
selfing,	81
shifting	into	Self,	151–52
small	sense	of	self,	78,	80,	82–84,	133–34,	154–58
thought-based	sense	of,	81
unblending	and,	136,	144,	166

self-awareness,	85,	86
self-referencing	loop,	81



Self-energy,	144,	145–46,	149
eight	Cs	of,	146
imbalance	of,	147

Self-essence,	144–45,	149
eleven	Is	of,	145
imbalance	of,	147

Self-leadership,	144,	146–47,	149,	159–60
abiding	in,	152,	153–54
imbalance	of,	147–48
living	from,	159–60
nine	Ps	of,	146

separation,	feeling/sense	of,	80,	86
serenity,	15
shakti,	115
shamatha,	39
shavasana,	127
shift
to	awake	awareness,	16,	18–19,	24,	28,	42,	48,	53,	166
in	awareness,	11,	16,	18–19,	22,	24,	28,	42,	44,	46–47,	53
background-to-foreground,	152
in	consciousness,	9,	11
in	identification,	89
in	identity,	151–52
into	Ground	of	Being,	115
into	Self,	151–52
into	source	of	mind,	40

Shift	into	Freedom	(Kelly),	ii,	5,	107
Siegel,	Dan,	87,	146
simultaneous	mind,	108
Six	Points	of	Tilopa,	118
sky-gazing,	111
small	mind,	19,	79,	80–81
shifting	out	of,	30,	45,	49
types	of	awareness,	85

small	self,	80,	82–84,	133–34
four	“don’ts”	of,	155
shifting	out	of,	133



six	“shoulds”	of,	156–58
types	of	awareness,	85

sound,	Mindful	Glimpse	with,	124
source	of	being,	49
source	of	mind,	16,	19,	79
awake	awareness	as,	19,	20,	21

space,	105,	169
Awareness	of	Space	(Mindful	Glimpse),	98
negative	space,	105
between	thoughts	(Mindful	Glimpse),	104–5
two	types	of,	105

spaced	out	(trap),	169
spacious	awareness,	46,	49,	51,	59,	94
aware	of	itself,	103,	112
recognizing,	94
uniting	with	local	awareness,	102–3

spiritual	bypass,	142,	143,	176
spiritual	manager,	159
spiritual	pride,	181
spiritual	robot,	179
spiritual	superego,	181–82
Sri	Lanka,	1,	28
stillness,	115,	121
Four	Postures	of	Dynamic	Stillness	(Mindful	Glimpse),	55–56
stuck	in	(trap),	170

stress	reduction,	mindfulness-based	(MBSR),	3,	61
subpersonalities,	133–42
See	also	parts	(subpersonalities)

subtle	energy	awareness,	85,	86–87
subtle	mind,	87
suffering,	44,	79–85
causes	of,	28,	38,	44,	79–80,	82,	84
dukkha,	79
perspective	and,	79
relief	of,	38,	79–85,	137–38
three	hypotheses	of,	79–85
See	also	hypotheses



sunyata	(emptiness),	83
surrender,	155,	159,	167
Sutra	Mahamudra,	3–4,	44–45,	48

task-positive	network,	40
therapist/teacher/guide,	77,	140–41,	153
Theravada	Buddhism,	3,	28,	29,	44
interdependent	arising	in,	50

theta	waves,	41
thoughts,	81
identification	with,	44
mindfulness	of,	47
shame-based,	138,	141
space	between	(Mindful	Glimpse),	104–5
thought-based	knowing,	19
thought-based	sense	of	self,	81
unhooking	awareness	from,	11,	19,	46,	48–49,	53–54,	60,	61,	81,	99
witnessing,	50
See	also	knowing

Tibetan	Buddhism,	3,	44
direct	path/essence	traditions,	3,	28
emptiness-bliss,	115
glimpsing	in,	11
looking	at	your	own	face,	47
non-meditation,	14
“one	taste”	in,	50,	90
recognition	and	realization	in,	103
sky-gazing,	111
Tonglen	practice,	125
union	of	emptiness	and	appearance,	50

Tilopa,	118
timelessness,	15
Tonglen	practice,	125
Toward	a	Psychology	of	Awakening	(Welwood),	176
Traleg	Rinpoche,	45
Transcendental	Meditation	(TM),	27
traps,	detours,	and	rerouting,	169–82



triggering	events,	139–40
true	nature,	16,	33,	37,	79,	82,	134,	174
remembering,	33–34

Tsoknyi	Rinpoche,	175
Tulku	Urgyen	Rinpoche,	1,	28–29,	174
turning	the	light	of	awareness	around,	46
types	of	awareness,	85–91

unblending,	136,	144,	166
unfolding,	152,	160,	174
union	of	emptiness	and	appearance,	50,	108
unity,	29,	39,	51,	109
of	infinite	and	finite,	51
nonduality,	39–40
of	subject	and	object,	50,	103

unity	consciousness,	16,	82,	134
unknown,	154,	175
fear	of,	175
letting	go	into,	155
moving	toward,	154
openness	to,	159
shifting	through,	154

unlearning,	30

vipassana	(insight	meditation),	5,	28,	39
Satipatthana	Sutta,	47

visual	process,	96
visualization
Memory	Door	(Mindful	Glimpse),	13–14
yogic	practices,	44

waking	up.	See	awakening
wei	wu	wei	(effortless	effort),	14
well-being,	4,	23,	29,	51
as	already	within	us,	79,	114,	160,	168
awake	awareness	and,	17,	34,	108
Memory	Door	experience	of	(Mindful	Glimpse),	13–14



realization	of	Self	and,	84
Welwood,	John,	176
Who	am	I?,	46,	117,	128
Who	Is	Aware	Now?	(Mindful	Glimpse),	84
wisdom	traditions,	ancient,	9,	13,	43,	44–45,	169
translation	of,	45

witness
big-sky,	no-self	witness,	50,	106,	108
mindful	witness,	38–39,	50,	88,	106,	108
witness	protection	program,	38–39,	170
witness	state,	18

Wizard	of	Oz	metaphors,	173–74
Wordless	Awareness	(Mindful	Glimpse),	12

yoga,	37,	44,	61,	165
Awareness	Yoga	(Mindful	Glimpse),	105–6
nirvikalpa	samadhi,	127
yoga	nidra	(yogic	sleep),	127

you-turn,	100–102
Mindful	Glimpse,	102

Zen	Buddhism,	3,	29
awake	awareness	in,	21
“enlightenment	is	acceptance	of	imperfection,”	180
taking	the	backward	step,	46

Zen	koan,	11
Zen	meditation,	30
zone	(“being	in	the	zone”),	1,	15,	115



L
About	the	Author

och	Kelly,	MDiv,	LCSW,	is	author	of	Shift	into	Freedom:	The	Science
and	Practice	of	Open-Hearted	Awareness,	which	was	named	one	of	the	“Top	10
Best	Books	of	the	Year”	by	Spirituality	&	Health	magazine.	He	is	an	educator,
licensed	 psychotherapist,	 and	 recognized	 leader	 in	 the	 field	 of	 meditation
affiliated	with	Adyashanti.	Loch	 is	 the	 founder	 of	 the	 nonprofit	Open-Hearted
Awareness	 Institute.	 He	 is	 a	 graduate	 of	 Columbia	 University	 and	 Union
Theological	 Seminary,	 where	 he	 received	 a	 fellowship	 to	 study	 Insight
Meditation,	Advaita,	and	Tibetan	Buddhism	in	Sri	Lanka,	India,	and	Nepal.	He
has	 worked	 in	 community	 mental	 health,	 established	 homeless	 shelters,	 and
counseled	family	members	of	9/11	victims	in	New	York	City.

Loch	 trained	 with	 Tulku	 Urgyen	 Rinpoche	 and	 served	 on	 the	 Teacher’s
Council	 at	 New	 York	 Insight	 Meditation	 Center.	 He	 offers	 the	 advanced	 yet
simple	 direct	 methods	 of	 effortless	 mindfulness	 informed	 by	 psychology	 and
social	engagement.	He	collaborates	with	neuroscientists	at	Yale	University,	 the
University	of	Pennsylvania,	and	New	York	University	 to	study	how	awareness
training	can	enhance	compassion	and	well-being.

For	more	information,	visit	Loch’s	website,	effortlessmindfulness.org,	which
has	 a	 list	 of	 his	 upcoming	 retreats	 and	 workshops	 and	 free	 audio	 mindful
glimpses.	 Loch’s	 YouTube	 channel	 also	 has	 free	 videos	 of	 his	 teachings	 and
practices.

http://effortlessmindfulness.org


Also	by	Loch	Kelly

Books

Shift	into	Freedom:	The	Science	and	Practice	of	Open-Hearted	Awareness
(Loch’s	bestselling	book,	also	available	as	an	audiobook)

Audio	Programs

Shift	into	Freedom:	A	Training	in	the	Science	and	Practice	of	Open-Hearted
Awareness	(audio	of	glimpse	practices)

Effortless	Mindfulness	Now:	Awakening	Our	Natural	Capacity	for	Focus,
Freedom,	and	Joy



S
About	Sounds	True

ounds	True	is	a	multimedia	publisher	whose	mission	is	to	inspire	and
support	personal	 transformation	and	spiritual	awakening.	Founded	 in	1985	and
located	 in	 Boulder,	 Colorado,	 we	 work	 with	 many	 of	 the	 leading	 spiritual
teachers,	thinkers,	healers,	and	visionary	artists	of	our	time.	We	strive	with	every
title	 to	 preserve	 the	 essential	 “living	wisdom”	 of	 the	 author	 or	 artist.	 It	 is	 our
goal	to	create	products	that	not	only	provide	information	to	a	reader	or	listener,
but	that	also	embody	the	quality	of	a	wisdom	transmission.

For	 those	 seeking	 genuine	 transformation,	 Sounds	 True	 is	 your	 trusted
partner.	At	SoundsTrue.com	you	will	find	a	wealth	of	free	resources	to	support
your	 journey,	 including	 exclusive	 weekly	 audio	 interviews,	 free	 downloads,
interactive	learning	tools,	and	other	special	savings	on	all	our	titles.

To	 learn	more,	 please	 visit	 SoundsTrue.com/freegifts	 or	 call	 us	 toll-free	 at
800.333.9185.

http://www.soundstrue.com
http://www.soundstrue.com/freegifts


Sounds	True
Boulder,	CO	80306

©	2019	Loch	Kelly

Sounds	True	is	a	trademark	of	Sounds	True,	Inc.
All	rights	reserved.	No	part	of	this	book	may	be	used	or	reproduced	in	any	manner	without	written
permission	from	the	author	and	publisher.

The	exercises	in	this	book	are	not	intended	as	a	substitute	for	medical	or	psychological	advice,	diagnosis,	or
treatment.	Please	seek	the	advice	of	a	qualified	medical	expert	or	licensed	psychotherapist	first	if	you	need
treatment	or	care	of	any	sort.

Published	2019

Cover	design	by	Lisa	Kerans
Book	Design	by	Beth	Skelley

Printed	in	Canada

Library	of	Congress	Cataloging-in-Publication	Data

Names:	Kelly,	Loch,	author.
Title:	The	way	of	effortless	mindfulness	:	a	revolutionary	guide	for	living	an	awakened	life	/	Loch	Kelly.
Description:	Boulder,	CO	:	Sounds	True,	2019.	|	Includes	bibliographical	references	and	index.
Identifiers:	LCCN	2018046560	(print)	|	LCCN	2018049998	(ebook)	|	ISBN	9781683642336	(ebook)	|
ISBN	9781683642329	(pbk.)

Subjects:	LCSH:	Mindfulness	(Psychology)	|	Attention.	|	Awareness.	|	âSamatha	(Buddhism)
Classification:	LCC	BF637.M56	(ebook)	|	LCC	BF637.M56	K45	2019	(print)	|	DDC	158.1/3—dc23
LC	record	available	at	https://lccn.loc.gov/2018046560

https://lccn.loc.gov/2018046560


Praise	for	The	Way	of	Effortless	Mindfulness

“In	this	groundbreaking	guidebook,	Loch	Kelly	offers	contemporary	versions	of
ancient	practices	 to	help	us	access	 the	fundamental	experience	of	being	aware.
The	Way	of	Effortless	Mindfulness	teaches	a	unique	form	of	mindfulness,	which
is	 advanced,	 yet	 simple.	 Loch	 offers	 effective	ways	 to	 shift	 from	 focusing	 on
what	we	are	aware	of,	 to	awareness	of	awareness,	which	 is	one	 component	of
integrating	 consciousness,	 a	 process	 that	 can	 liberate	 our	 lives	 with	 meaning,
connection,	and	clarity.	What	a	beautiful	book!”

DANIEL	J.	SIEGEL,	MD
author	of	Aware:	The	Science	and	Practice	of	Presence

“The	Way	of	Effortless	Mindfulness	is	a	profound	and	practical	book	of	spiritual
guidance.	If	you	are	really	ready	to	awaken	through	and	through,	read	this	book,
put	it	into	practice,	and	it	will	transform	your	life.”

ADYASHANTI
author	of	The	Most	Important	Thing

“Loch	 Kelly	 offers	 a	 rich	 array	 of	 unique	 mindful	 glimpses	 that	 reveal	 our
naturally	 awake,	 openhearted	 awareness.	 His	 guidance	 is	 clear,	 precise,	 and
arises	 from	a	wise,	 caring	heart.	There	 are	very	 few	who	can	guide	with	 such
mastery.	 For	 those	 dedicated	 to	 realizing	 what	 is	 beyond	 our	 dualistic
perceptions,	The	Way	of	Effortless	Mindfulness	is	truly	a	gift.”

TARA	BRACH,	PHD
author	of	Radical	Acceptance

“Many	of	us	have	heard	 that	 it	 takes	years	of	discipline	and	effort	 to	 tame	 the
mind	in	order	to	taste	awakening.	Loch	Kelly	travelled	to	India	and	Nepal	to	find
traditions	 that	 could	 directly	 access	 our	 natural	 awakeness.	 In	 this	 profound
book,	 he	 offers	 his	 contemporary	 ways	 to	 ‘glimpse’	 our	 awake	 nature
immediately	and	heal	our	wounded	parts.	When	Loch	and	I	have	taught	together,
I	 have	 found,	 for	 myself	 and	 students,	 that	 Loch’s	 practices	 are	 amazingly
effective.	 The	 Way	 of	 Effortless	 Mindfulness	 brilliantly	 weaves	 together



meditation,	 neuroscience,	 and	 psychotherapy	 to	 truly	 support	 a	 compassionate
awakening.”

RICHARD	SCHWARTZ,	PHD
founder	of	Internal	Family	Systems	(IFS)

“The	Way	of	Effortless	Mindfulness	 is	 a	wonderful,	 timely	 book!	There	 is	 this
natural	 ground	 of	 our	 consciousness	 which	 is	 not	 bound	 by	 thoughts	 and
emotions,	from	which	we	can	experience	true	freedom	by	seeing	reality	clearly.
Such	 consciousness	 is	 the	 effortless	 mindfulness	 taught	 in	 many	 sacred
traditions.	 Loch	 Kelly	 skillfully	 explains	 how	 we	 can	 access	 it.	 I	 hope	 many
people	will	read	this	guidebook	to	illuminate	their	path	of	awakening.”

ANAM	THUBTEN
Tibetan	Buddhist	teacher	and	author	of	The	Magic	of	Awareness

“Loch	provides,	 in	 a	 single	work,	 a	 comprehensive	guide	 that	 spans	 the	 entire
spectrum	of	effortless	mindfulness	practice.	Loch	does	 this	by	expertly	sharing
meditation	from	a	wide	variety	of	cultures	and	traditions.	The	Way	of	Effortless
Mindfulness	is	written	from	deep	mastery	and	personal	experience.	You	feel	that
as	you	read,	and	it’s	inspiring.”

SHINZEN	YOUNG
author	of	The	Science	of	Enlightenment

“The	Way	of	Effortless	Mindfulness	is	a	deep	drink	of	water	for	the	thirsty	heart.
It	 is	 a	 practical	 guide	 for	 cultivating	 states	 of	 ease,	 compassion,	 and	 creative
flow,	yes.	 It	 is	also	a	celebration	of	our	birthright.	Loch	Kelly	 reminds	us	 that
awakening	 does	 not	 have	 to	 hurt.	 We	 were	 born	 to	 take	 refuge	 in	 our
interconnectedness	 with	 All	 That	 Is.	 And	 it	 is	 from	 this	 place	 of	 graceful
presence	that	we	have	hope	of	stepping	up	to	alleviate	suffering	around	us.”

MIRABAI	STARR
author	of	Wild	Mercy

“The	 Way	 of	 Effortless	 Mindfulness	 is	 a	 brilliant	 and	 essential	 meditation
guidebook.	 Loch	 beautifully	 introduces	 us	 to	 the	 next	 stage	 of	 mindfulness,
bringing	it	into	heartfelt	relationship	with	others.	In	Loch	Kelly,	you’ve	found	a
wonderful	guide	for	the	important	journey	of	awakening,	which	is	so	vital	in	our



world	today.”

LAMA	SURYA	DAS
author	of	Awakening	the	Buddha	Within

“Now	 that	mindfulness	 is	 widely	 embraced	 by	mainstream	 culture,	 it	 may	 be
possible	 for	 greater	 numbers	 to	 take	 a	 deeper	 step	 into	 effortless	mindfulness.
Though	 there	 is	 an	 initial	 effort,	 Loch	 helps	 us	 discover	 an	 awareness	 that’s
already	effortlessly	awake.	The	Way	of	Effortless	Mindfulness	is	an	elegant,	slim
volume	of	grace	that	many	will	benefit	from.	May	this	profound	guidebook	help
you	live	a	compassionate,	awakened	life,	so	needed	in	times	like	ours.”

TERRY	PATTEN
author	of	A	New	Republic	of	the	Heart

“Loch	 Kelly	 presents	 a	 groundbreaking	 approach	 with	 a	 unique	 form	 of
mindfulness—a	 path	 both	 gentle	 and	 powerful.	 The	 Way	 of	 Effortless
Mindfulness	makes	an	important	contribution	to	our	growing	understanding	that
spiritual	 awakening	 and	 personal	 healing	 are	 two	 sides	 of	 the	 same	 valuable
coin.”

JUDITH	BLACKSTONE,	PHD
author	of	Trauma	and	the	Unbound	Body

“Inspiring	and	practical,	The	Way	of	Effortless	Mindfulness	offers	us	an	owner’s
manual	for	awakening	to	our	fullest	potential	as	human	beings.	Through	simple
yet	 powerful	 exercises,	 Loch	 Kelly	 provides	 direct	 path	 teachings	 that
exquisitely	 point	 to	 and	 allow	us	 to	 easily	 recognize	our	most	 essential	 nature
that	lies	at	the	heart	of	unbreakable	well-being.	This	is	an	inspirational	gem	of	a
guidebook	 for	 accessing	 the	 spiritual	 wisdom	 that	 lies	 at	 the	 core	 of	 our
humanness.”

RICHARD	MILLER,	PHD
author	of	The	iRest	Program	for	Healing	PTSD

“The	Way	 of	 Effortless	Mindfulness	 is	 an	 extraordinary	 guidebook.	With	 deep
simplicity	and	subtle	clarity,	Loch	Kelly	offers	us	ways	 to	glimpse	 the	natural,
ever-present	 awareness	 that	 is	 our	 True	 Nature	 and	 presents	 mindfulness
teachings	and	micro-meditations	that	reveal	it	‘effortlessly’	within	ourselves.”



KRISHNA	DAS
chant	leader	and	Grammy®-nominated	vocalist

“Are	you	curious	about	the	whole	mindfulness	thing	and	not	sure	where	to	start?
Or	are	you	a	seasoned	mindfulness	practitioner	who	thinks	they	know	all	there	is
to	know	about	this	whole	mindful	thing?	Well,	Loch	Kelly	is	your	guy	and	The
Way	 of	 Effortless	 Mindfulness	 is	 your	 book.	 Loch,	 in	 very	 clear	 and	 concise
writing,	 brings	 so	 many	 new	 (or	 often	 overlooked)	 pointers,	 practices,	 and
teachings	 to	 the	 table.	 This	 is	 an	 exceptionally	 accessible	 book	 for	 anyone
interested	in	a	new	version	of	mindfulness.	Oh,	how	I	wish	I	had	Loch	Kelly’s
The	Way	of	Effortless	Mindfulness	when	 I	 first	began	my	spiritual	 exploration.
Thank	you,	Loch,	for	knocking	this	one	out	of	the	park!”

CHRIS	GROSSO
author	of	Dead	Set	on	Living

“The	Way	of	Effortless	Mindfulness	artfully	challenges	and	guides	us	to	make	the
important	 leap	 from	 our	 conditioned	 mind	 into	 awake,	 heartfelt	 awareness.
Inspired	by	nondual	Tibetan	 teachings,	 this	original,	 insightful,	good-humored,
and	psychologically	savvy	book	opens	new	vistas	and	offers	a	treasure	trove	of
illuminating	practices.	Welcome	to	awakening	with	small	glimpses	in	the	midst
of	your	daily	life.	Highly	recommended!”

JOHN	PRENDERGAST,	PHD
author	of	In	Touch

“Loch	Kelly’s	cutting-edge	new	book	offers	a	comprehensive	program	of	direct
path	 practices	 for	 recognizing,	 abiding	 in,	 and	 living	 from	 our	 natural	 awake
awareness.	 The	 Way	 of	 Effortless	 Mindfulness	 is	 a	 brilliant	 and	 original
guidebook	uniting	 “nondual	mindfulness,”	 neuroscience,	 and	 psychotherapy.	 It
will	 be	 helpful	 both	 for	 newcomers	 and	 for	 those	 ready	 to	 live	 an	 embodied,
awakened	life.	I	highly	recommend	this	book!”

STEPHAN	BODIAN
author	of	Beyond	Mindfulness

“I	love	this	book	because	it	is	so	practical.	It	contains	a	treasure	trove	of	simple
and	effective	exercises	that	help	us	to	realize	our	true	nature.	Loch	Kelly	shows
us	 that	 enlightenment	 is	 not	 esoteric	 and	 elusive,	 but	 always	 close	 to	 us,	 and



always	accessible.	In	The	Way	of	Effortless	Mindfulness,	Loch	shows	us	how	to
gain	access	to	it.”

STEVE	TAYLOR,	PHD
author	of	The	Leap	and	Spiritual	Science

“Once	again,	Loch	Kelly	has	done	a	masterful	 job	of	 sharing	accessible,	wise,
and	compassionate	meditations	and	teachings.	The	Way	of	Effortless	Mindfulness
offers	 a	 doorway	 into	 a	 profound,	 cutting-edge	 form	 of	 mindfulness.	 With
Loch’s	 guidance,	 effortless	mindfulness	 can	 become	 accessible	 to	 anyone.	Try
them	out,	go	into	them	deeply,	and	watch	these	practices	change	your	life!”

DIANA	WINSTON
director	of	mindfulness	education	at	UCLA	and	author	of	The	Little	Book	of

Being

“Loch	 has	 a	 deep	 understanding	 of	meditation	 and	manifests	 the	wisdom	 and
compassion	 that	 comes	 from	 this.	 In	The	Way	 of	 Effortless	Mindfulness,	 Loch
shows	 us	 how	 to	 practice	 a	 unique	 form	 of	 mindfulness.	 These	 effortless
mindfulness	 practices	 are	 directly	 in	 line	 with	 the	 beneficial	 qualities	 of
effortless	 awareness	 that	 my	 neuroscience	 lab	 has	 studied.	 I	 wholeheartedly
recommend	these	practices	to	my	students,	and	to	you.”

JUDSON	BREWER,	MD,	PHD
director	of	research	at	Brown	University	Mindfulness	Center	and	author	of	The

Craving	Mind

“Loch	 Kelly’s	 book	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 important	 awakening	 manuals	 of	 our
times.	There	is	no	doubt	that	the	definitive	revolution	for	our	world	is	the	waking
up	and	growing	up	of	humankind.	Loch’s	deep	heart	and	profound	wisdom	shine
through	the	words	in	a	way	that	makes	awakening	available	to	us	no	matter	our
backgrounds,	 belief	 systems,	 or	 previous	 experience.	 The	 Way	 of	 Effortless
Mindfulness	is	a	set	of	valuable	keys	to	the	treasure	that	is	already	within	you.”

KURT	JOHNSON,	PHD
coauthor	The	Coming	Interspiritual	Age


	Title
	Dedication
	Contents
	Introduction
	Part I: Discovering
	1. The Next Stage of Mindfulness
	2. Discovering Effortless Mindfulness
	3. Awakening Glimpse by Glimpse
	4. Effortless Mindfulness Pain Relief

	Part II: Unfolding
	5. Three Hypotheses
	6. Practicing the Five Foundations of Effortless Mindfulness

	Part III: Abiding
	7. The Ultimate Medicine of No-self Self
	8. How to Remain Awake
	9. Glimpsing All the Way Home

	Appendix: Traps, Detours, and Rerouting Instructions
	Acknowledgments
	Notes
	List of Mindful Glimpses
	Index
	About the Author
	Also by Loch Kelly
	About Sounds True
	Copyright
	Praise for The Way of Effortless Mindfulness

