



































Getting Real: Ten Truth Skills You Need to Live an Authentic Life






GETTING
REAL



Other	books	by	Susan	M.	Campbell,	Ph.D.

Beyond	the	Power	Struggle
The	Couple’s	Journey
Earth	Community

Expanding	Your	Teaching	Potential
From	Chaos	to	Confidence



GETTING
REAL
SUSAN	CAMPBELL,	PH.D.

FOREWORD	BY	BRAD	BLANTON,	PH.D.

An	H	J	Kramer	Book

	 published	in	a	joint	venture	with

New	World	Library



An	H	J	Kramer	Book
published	in	a	joint	venture	with
New	World	Library

Editorial	office: Administrative	office:
H	J	Kramer New	World	Library
P.O.	Box	1082 14	Pamaron	Way
Tiburon,	California	94920 Novato,	California	94949

Copyright	©	2001	by	Susan	M.	Campbell

Cover	design	by	Mary	Beth	Salmon
Text	design	by	Mary	Ann	Casler

All	 rights	 reserved.	 This	 book	may	 not	 be	 reproduced	 in	 whole	 or	 in	 part,	 or	 transmitted	 in	 any	 form,
without	written	 permission	 from	 the	 publisher,	 except	 by	 a	 reviewer	who	may	 quote	 brief	 passages	 in	 a
review;	nor	may	any	part	of	this	book	be	reproduced,	stored	in	a	retrieval	system,	or	transmitted	in	any	form
or	by	any	means	electronic,	mechanical,	photocopying,	recording,	or	other,	without	written	permission	from
the	publisher.

Library	of	Congress	Cataloging-in-Publication	Data
Campbell,	Susan	M.,	1941–
Getting	real	:	the	ten	truth	skills	you	need	to	live	an	authentic	life	/
by	Susan	M.	Campbell.
					p.	cm.
Includes	bibliographical	references	and	index.
ISBN	0-915811-92-8	(perfect	:	alk.	paper)
1.	Self-actualization	(Psychology)	I.	Title.

BF637.S4	C343	2001
158—dc21																																																														00-013263

First	Printing,	April	2001
ISBN	0-915811-92-8
Printed	in	Canada	on	acid-free	paper
Distributed	to	the	trade	by	Publishers	Group	West

10	9	8	7	6	5	4	3	2	1



On	personal	integrity	hangs	humanitys	fate.
—	Buckminster	Fuller



CONTENTS

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

FOREWORD	by	Brad	Blanton,	Ph.D.

INTRODUCTION

ONE	How	to	Stop	Being	Right	and	Start	Being	Real

TWO	Experiencing	What	Is:	To	Get	Where	You	Need	to	Go,	Be	Where	You	Are

THREE	Being	Transparent:	Freedom’s	 Just	Another	Word	 for	Nothing	Left	 to
Hide

FOUR	Noticing	Your	Intent:	Is	It	to	Relate	or	to	Control?

FIVE	Welcoming	Feedback:	It’s	How	We	Learn

SIX	Asserting	What	You	Want	and	Don’t	Want:	Supporting	Your	Feelings	with
Action

SEVEN	Taking	Back	Projections:	Discovering	Your	Other	Side

EIGHT	Revising	an	Earlier	Statement:	It’s	Okay	to	Go	Out	and	Come	In	Again

NINE	Holding	Differences:	Seeing	Other	Viewpoints	Without	Losing	Your	Own

TEN	Sharing	Mixed	Emotions:	You’re	Not	Crazy,	You’re	Complex

ELEVEN	Embracing	the	Silence	of	Not	Knowing:	Entering	the	Fertile	Void

TWELVE	Serenity,	Presence,	and	Compassion

APPENDIX	A	Resource	Guide

APPENDIX	B	Communication	Guidelines	for	Getting	Real

APPENDIX	C	Description	and	Ordering	Information	for	Card	Games



INDEX

ABOUT	THE	AUTHOR



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I	would	like	to	express	my	love	and	gratitude	to	my	mother	and	father,	who	first
encouraged	me	to	listen	to	and	trust	my	inner	voice.	I	can	still	hear	my	mother’s
words,	delivered	in	her	slow	southern	drawl	as	I	 toddled	off	 to	my	first	day	of
kindergarten,	 “Remember,	 Susan,	 that	 teacher’s	 not	 the	 boss	 o’	 you.”	 She
continues	to	support	my	uniqueness	to	this	day.
I	 am	deeply	 grateful	 to	my	 friend	Robert	Chaffey,	who	 by	 his	 example	 has

given	me	the	courage	to	become	more	transparent	in	both	my	private	and	public
life.	He	has	been	my	greatest	teacher.
I	 am	 blessed	 to	 have	 many	 creative	 friends	 who	 have	 read	 and	 critiqued

various	 versions	 of	 the	 manuscript.	 Many	 thanks	 to	 Tom	 Huntington,	 Pam
LaCoe,	Dan	Fox,	Robert	Willard,	Brad	Blanton,	Liz	Craig,	Dean	LaCoe,	Susan
Bradley,	Greg	Small,	Peller	Marion,	and	Flo	Hoylman.
I	owe	so	much	to	my	early	teachers:	Fritz	Perls,	Marilyn	Rosanes-Beret,	Erv

Polster,	Miriam	Polster,	Robert	Resnick,	Jim	Simkin,	Bernie	Gunther,	Charlotte
Selver,	 Steve	Tobin,	 and	Virginia	 Satir,	 and	 to	my	more	 recent	 teachers:	Brad
Blanton,	Paul	Lowe,	and	Dhiravamsa.	The	challenging	support	I	have	received
from	these	gifted	mentors	has	enabled	me	to	offer	a	similar	type	of	mentoring	to
others.
Much	 appreciation	 also	 goes	 to	 the	 wonderful	 people	 at	 H	 J	 Kramer/New

World	 Library,	 who	 have	 helped	 me	 prepare	 the	 book	 for	 publication:	 Linda
Kramer,	Hal	Kramer,	Georgia	Hughes,	and	Mimi	Kusch.



FOREWORD

Those	of	 us	who	understand	honesty	 as	 a	 fundamental	 spiritual	 practice	 know
that	simply	being	honest,	like	meditation,	helps	us	to	experience	life	more	fully.
Whether	we’re	meditating	alone	or	being	honest	when	sharing	with	others,	we
find	 that	 a	 natural	 ease,	 happiness,	 and	 love	 occurs	 when	 we	 simply	 pay
attention	 and	 notice	 what	 is	 going	 on	 rather	 than	 thinking	 about	 it.	 In	 fact,	 a
further	magnification	 of	 the	 already	 enhanced	 experience	 of	 being	 that	 comes
from	noticing	occurs	when	we	accurately	describe	our	experience	of	noticing	to
another.	Intimacy	happens.	Two	beings	know	each	other	and	have	learned	more
about	 being	 itself.	 Rather	 than	 getting	 smarter,	 this	 process	 involves	 getting
simpler,	even	“dumber.”	Come	to	think	of	it,	paying	attention	to	paying	attention
is	really	kind	of	a	dumb	idea	itself.	Luckily	for	us,	Susan	Campbell	has	written	a
pretty	dumb	book	 to	explain	 this	dumb	idea	 to	us.	 In	 this	dumb	book	she	says
some	really	wise	things:	We	don’t	have	to	protect	ourselves	all	the	time,	like	we
all	learned	to	do	in	order	to	survive,	because	“we’re	big	now.”	Although	it	seems
as	if	most	of	us	should	get	that,	most	of	us	don’t	most	of	the	time.	It’s	too	simple
for	a	mind	to	get.
Susan	 also	 says,	 “In	 most	 human	 interactions,	 relating	 is	 preferable	 to

controlling	because	it	brings	you	into	the	present.”	Ain’t	it	the	truth	—	and	too
few	 of	 us	 get	 to	 discover	 that	 truth	 before	 we	 die.	 Susan	 believes	 we	 human
beings	are	“evolving	beyond	control-oriented	communication.”	God,	I	hope	so.
This	fine	book	provides	guidelines	for	“getting	real”	as	an	alternative	to	merely
“being	right.”	(Susan	has	the	best	of	both	worlds	because	she	gets	to	“be	right”
about	“getting	real.”)
I	 love	Susan	Campbell.	She	has	been	a	part	of	our	Radical	Honesty	cult	 for

about	five	years	now.	A	lot	of	what	she	says	in	this	book	she	learned	by	being
honest	as	a	personal	practice	and	from	being	with	other	honest	people.	We	are
some	 of	 the	 dumbest	 people	 you	 would	 ever	 want	 to	 meet.	 Now,	 mind	 you,
we’re	not	completely	cured	of	our	smartness.	We	still	have	to	remind	each	other
about	how	smartness	blocks	wisdom.	We	still	need	to	practice	all	the	time	to	stay
grounded	in	noticing	so	some	wisdom	occurs,	now	and	then,	more	or	less	of	its
own	accord.	With	this	book,	Susan	has	used	her	smartness	in	service	to	what	she



has	 learned	 through	 noticing	 like	 a	 dummie.	 It	 is	 a	way	 to	 heal	 herself.	 It’s	 a
recovery	program.	She	has	done	a	beautiful	 job.	Lucky	for	us,	we	get	 to	come
along.

—	Brad	Blanton,	Ph.D.,
author	of	Radical	Honesty



INTRODUCTION

As	you,	the	reader,	and	I,	the	author,	embark	on	this	exploration	of	how	to	live
authentically,	 I’d	 like	 to	 share	 some	 experiences	 that	 have	 led	 me	 to	 be	 so
passionate	about	this	 topic.	I	grew	up	in	a	happy	home	with	wonderful	parents
and	three	siblings	who	loved	and	supported	me,	and	still	 I’m	as	screwed	up	as
everybody	 else!	 My	 ability	 to	 be	 authentically	 myself	 started	 getting
compromised	just	after	I	was	born.	That	was	when	I	started	taking	on	a	bunch	of
false	 beliefs	 about	 how	 the	 world	 works	 and	 how	 people	 are.	 From	 piecing
together	the	details	of	my	early	life,	based	on	my	parents’	accounts,	here’s	how	I
figure	that	happened.

The	Story	of	My	Personality

When	my	mom	tried	to	nurse	me,	her	milk	did	not	come	down.	As	a	hungry
infant,	 I	 sucked	and	sucked,	harder	and	harder,	 trying	 to	get	 the	nourishment	 I
needed.	No	matter	how	hard	I	sucked,	nothing	came.	I	felt	frustrated	and	empty,
and	there	seemed	to	be	nothing	I	could	do	to	escape	that	feeling	of	emptiness.	I
was	afraid,	bewildered,	alone,	and	in	pain.	And	my	mom	felt	pain,	too,	but	hers
was	the	pain	of	having	her	nipples	ravaged.	So	she	took	me	from	her	breast	and
put	a	bottle	in	my	mouth.	This	critical	incident	created	in	my	little	mind	what	I
now	 call	 false	 belief	 #1:	 if	 you	 express	 your	 wants	 too	 strongly,	 you’ll	 get
punished.
My	mom	still	held	me	in	her	arms	often,	but	when	our	bodies	were	close,	she

could	feel	in	me	a	restless	energy	that	never	seemed	to	be	satisfied.	She	tried	to
comfort	me	and	to	help	me	feel	safe,	but	her	efforts	were	futile.	Since	I	was	her
firstborn,	 she	 was	 quite	 vulnerable	 to	 self-doubts	 about	 her	 adequacy	 as	 a
mother.	 Sensing	 this,	 I	 feared	making	 her	 feel	 even	more	 uncomfortable.	 So	 I
tried	 to	 deal	 with	 my	 restless	 dissatisfaction	 within	 myself.	 The	 solution	 I
discovered	was	to	sleep	most	of	the	time,	which	kept	everybody	“happy.”	Thus
evolved	 false	belief	#2:	you	need	 to	 shut	down	your	 feelings	 to	 avoid	making
others	uncomfortable.



Then	my	father	entered	the	picture.	He	and	I	bonded	right	away.	He	loved	to
hold	 and	 play	with	me.	My	 favorite	 game	was	when	 he	would	 “capture”	me,
surrounding	me	gently	with	his	big	body	so	I	couldn’t	get	away.	This	game	was
scary	in	a	really	delightful	way.
About	that	time	World	War	II	was	being	fought,	and	my	dad	was	called	into

service.	 I	 didn’t	 know	 what	 was	 going	 on	 as	 my	 parents	 prepared	 for	 his
departure,	but	 I	 could	 sense	 in	my	mom	a	deep	 sadness	 as	 she	anticipated	her
loss.	On	a	gray	day	in	November	1944,	the	three	of	us	drove	to	the	train	station
to	see	my	dad	off.	I	was	pretty	silent	until	the	very	last	moments	before	he	got	on
the	 train.	 At	 that	 point	 I	 put	 all	 the	 pieces	 together	 and	 realized	 what	 was
happening.	 As	 he	 slowly	 walked	 away	 from	 us,	 I	 started	 screaming,	 “Daddy,
don’t	go!	Daddy,	don’t	go!”	But	in	spite	of	my	protests,	he	was	on	his	way,	and
false	belief	#3	was	hatched:	no	matter	how	much	you	want	something,	even	 if
you	 holler	 about	 it,	 you	won’t	 get	 it.	 This	 is	 especially	 true	when	 you	 really,
really	want	it.
My	mom	 and	 I	 survived	 just	 fine,	 eventually	Dad	 came	 home,	 and	 our	 life

became	 routine	 again.	At	 this	 point,	 I	was	 starting	grammar	 school.	 For	me	 it
was	 a	 time	 of	 being	 very	 observant	 of	 and	 curious	 about	 everything	 and
everyone	 and	 being	 fascinated	 with	 the	 similarities	 and	 differences	 among
people.	I	noticed	something	about	my	dad	that	disturbed	me	greatly.	He	had	what
we	called	in	my	family	“his	temper.”	He	was	embarrassed	and	apologetic	about
this	 characteristic,	 but	 that	 didn’t	 keep	me	 from	 feeling	 fearful	 every	 time	 he
raised	 his	 voice	 at	 me:	 “Susan,	 stop	 your	 youncing!”	 I	 can	 still	 hear	 him
snapping	at	me	when	my	demands	for	attention	would	start	to	bother	him.	(Even
though	beliefs	#1	and	#2	prohibited	bothering	others,	those	beliefs	only	applied
to	 the	 really	 deep	 and	 important	 needs.	 I	 could	 still	 be	 incessant	 about	 petty
things.)
My	dad’s	 temper	 flare-ups	 scared	me	—	even	 though	 I	now	know	 that	 they

were	relatively	mild	compared	to	those	of	some	other	dads.	But	I	was	becoming
a	smart	little	kid,	so	instead	of	feeling	my	fear,	I	quickly	learned	that	it	was	more
comfortable	to	have	inner	conversations	about	how	stupid	his	outbursts	were.	I
recall	thinking	to	myself,	“He	got	so	worked	up	over	such	a	small	thing.”	Once
or	twice	I	even	voiced	my	criticisms:	my	dad	was	going	on	loudly	about	“what
could	have	happened”	as	a	result	of	something	I’d	done,	and	I	had	the	audacity
to	shout	back,	“Well	it	could’ve	happened,	but	it	didn’t!”	Probably	the	second	or
third	time	I	did	that,	I	got	a	slap	across	the	mouth.	Out	of	these	experiences	came
false	beliefs	#4	and	#5:	you	can	avoid	painful	feelings	by	becoming	judgmental



or	critical	of	others;	and	it’s	not	safe	to	talk	back	to	an	angry	person.	It’s	better
just	to	keep	cool.
Along	the	path	of	my	life,	I	have	picked	up	a	few	more	dysfunctional	beliefs,

but	 these	five	will	do	 to	give	you	an	idea	of	how	I	 learned	that	 it’s	not	safe	 to
feel	and	express	your	true	feelings.	My	story	also	shows	how	I	learned	strategies
for	staying	safe	and	 in	control:	by	not	expressing	wants	or	anger	and	by	being
judgmental	when	I	was	really	afraid.	 I	spent	 the	years	 that	 followed	perfecting
these	 strategies.	 The	 result	 was	 that	 even	 though	 there	 was	 a	 deeply	 feeling,
caring,	loving,	hurting,	fearful	human	being	in	there	somewhere,	what	I	mostly
showed	 to	 the	 world	 during	 much	 of	 my	 life	 was	 the	 competent,	 intelligent,
helpful,	 overcontrolled	 good	 girl.	 This	 is	 why	 I’m	 so	 passionate	 about	 the
practice	of	Getting	Real	—	because	for	so	much	of	my	life	I	occupied	only	a	few
of	the	many	rooms	of	my	emotional	house.
As	a	psychotherapist	for	the	past	thirty-four	years,	I	have,	of	course,	observed

that	I	am	not	alone	in	this	game	of	limiting	ourselves	in	the	interests	of	staying
safe.	It	is	part	of	the	human	journey	to	start	out	whole,	then	to	continually	cut	off
parts	of	ourselves	in	response	to	real	or	imagined	pain,	and	to	spend	the	rest	of
our	lives	searching	for	what	we	have	cut	off,	buried,	and	forgotten	about.	Even
entire	 cultures	 seem	 to	 operate	within	 a	 very	 narrow	 band	 of	 the	 total	 human
experience.	Thus,	we	project	onto	others	what	we	cannot	 feel,	 experience,	and
own	up	 to	 in	ourselves.	War	and	conflict	are	 the	 result,	when	all	 the	while	we
long	for	peace.
Getting	 Real	 is	 about	 reclaiming,	 reviving,	 and	 reexperiencing	 these	 buried

parts	of	ourselves.	In	my	own	journey	I	have	studied	and	applied	many	methods
toward	 this	end.	After	years	of	exploration,	 I	have	 found	 that	 the	quickest	and
best	 route	 to	wholeness	 is	 honest	 communication	with	 yourself	 and	others.	Of
course,	in	attempting	to	follow	this	simple	prescription,	you	will	come	up	against
all	the	ways	you	have	cut	yourself	off	from	the	truth	of	your	existence.	So	honest
communication	becomes	your	“awareness	practice”	—	your	vehicle	for	noticing
what	you	avoid	 (your	 irrational	 fears)	and	how	you	go	about	avoiding	 it	 (your
control	patterns).

Honest	communication	becomes	your	“awareness	practice”
—	your	vehicle	for	noticing	what	you	avoid	(your	irrational
fears)	and	how	you	go	about	avoiding	it	(your	control
patterns).



Using	Honesty	to	Stay	with	Your	Experience

Honest	communication	is	not	only	the	quickest,	most	direct	path	to	wholeness,
it	is	also	the	least	expensive.	Without	spending	years	in	a	therapist’s	office,	you
can	learn	a	set	of	communication	practices	that	will	lead	you	to	the	truth	of	your
present	experience	and	out	of	the	morass	of	judgments,	generalizations,	shoulds,
with-	holdings,	 assessments,	 and	explanations	 about	why	you	are	 the	way	you
are.	 These	 practices	 are	 a	 way	 of	 using	 language	 to	 help	 you	 stay	 with	 your
present	felt	experience	—	what	you	see,	hear,	smell,	feel,	remember,	sense,	and
intuit.	You	 can	 learn	 these	 practices	 in	 a	 relatively	 short	 time	 period,	 since	 so
many	 other	 explorers	 have	 already	 charted	 the	 way.	 Buddhist	 meditation
practice,	 Gestalt	 therapy,	 Jungian	 analysis,	 sensory	 awareness,	 Reichian	 and
bioenergetic	body	work	—	these	are	the	main	underpinnings	of	the	work	that	I
call	Getting	Real.

These	practices	are	a	way	of	using	language	to	help	you	stay
with	your	present	felt	experience.

The	reason	honest	communication	works	so	well	as	a	growth	path	is	that	most
of	the	time,	when	you	go	deeply	and	patiently	into	an	experience,	feeling	it	fully
without	escaping	into	a	control	pattern,	it	changes!	I’m	not	kidding.	The	way	out
is	to	go	deeply	in.	You	will	discover	this	truth	for	yourself	as	you	engage	in	the
practices	—	I	call	 them	the	 ten	 truth	skills	—	suggested	 in	 this	book.	Some	of
these	skills	 take	quite	a	bit	of	courage.	Others	actually	ease	 the	way	and	make
honesty	less	threatening.	When	you	use	them	in	combination,	you	will	find	that
they	 support	 one	 another	 and	 make	 the	 whole	 process	 of	 being	 honest	 quite
enlivening	and	less	frightening	than	you	might	imagine.
The	Getting	Real	process	will	go	faster	if	you	have	a	skilled	coach	or	teacher

to	help	you	avoid	the	pitfalls	of	self-deception,	and	it	absolutely	requires	at	least
one	or	two	committed	others	who	agree	to	undertake	this	journey	with	you.	So
after	you	read	this	book,	be	sure	to	share	it	with	anyone	who	might	be	a	likely
candidate	for	the	role	of	“committed	other.”
Getting	Real	has	worked	and	still	works	for	me	and	for	the	hundreds	of	others

I	have	coached	in	this	method.	As	I	continue	to	do	this	work,	I	keep	learning	that



we	human	beings	have	far	more	potential	than	we	give	ourselves	credit	for:	there
is	 so	much	more	 love	 that	we	 could	 feel,	 so	much	more	 reality	 that	we	 could
perceive,	so	much	more	excitement	and	energy	that	we	could	contain	and	vibrate
with.	 All	 we	 need	 is	 genuine	 curiosity,	 an	 openness	 to	 experiment,	 and	 a
willingness	to	experience	with	awareness	whatever	comes	up.	The	prize	you	will
attain	for	this	effort	is	a	deep	and	abiding	trust	in	yourself	and	in	life	that	no	one
can	ever	take	away	from	you.

All	we	need	is	genuine	curiosity,	an	openness	to	experiment,
and	a	willingness	to	experience	with	awareness	whatever
comes	up.

Getting	Real	develops	your	self-awareness.	You	engage	with	others	in	what	I
call	a	social	meditation	practice	in	which	you	support	one	another	in	unhooking
from	your	 self-image	 and	 your	 ideas	 about	 being	 “better”	 and	 risk	 being	 seen
just	as	you	are.	The	result	is	self-realization	—	making	real	the	parts	of	yourself
that	you	thought	you	had	to	hide	to	survive.	And	I	mean	all	the	parts,	not	just	the
pretty	ones.	Self-realization	also	leads	you	back	to	the	simple,	direct	awareness
of	yourself	as	a	being	 increasingly	free	of	your	personal	story	and	 the	 limiting
beliefs	you’ve	picked	up	along	the	way.	But	before	you	can	be	free	of	these,	you
need	to	be	willing	to	explore,	experiment,	and	discover	where	your	natural	flow
of	 energy	 is	 blocked.	 And	 to	 free	 yourself,	 you	 need	 to	 experience	 just	 how
unfree	you	are.

We’re	All	Hypocrites

As	 far	back	as	 I	 can	 remember,	 I’ve	been	on	a	campaign	 to	expose	 the	 fact
that	 we’re	 all	 hypocrites	 to	 one	 degree	 or	 another.	 We	 live	 in	 a	 world	 that
challenges	 our	 sense	 of	 integrity	 at	 every	 turn.	 We	 say	 we	 value	 a	 clean
environment,	 but	 we	 drive	 cars	 and	 ride	 in	 airplanes.	 We	 say	 we	 value
democracy,	but	we	secretly	want	our	own	way.	We	say	we	value	honesty,	but	we
frequently	withhold	our	true	feelings	to	avoid	conflict.	We	all	preach	one	thing
and	 practice	 another.	 Learning	 to	 live	 in	 the	 gap	 between	 our	 ideals	 and	 our
reality	 seems	 to	 be	 the	 koan	 of	 our	 age.	 This	 process	 is	 the	 true	 meaning	 of
sobriety	—	 the	 ability	 to	 honestly	 face	 the	 reality	 of	 our	 predicament	without



projecting	blame	onto	some	outside	force	and	without	looking	for	some	magical
rescue	from	the	challenges	of	living	with	integrity.
In	my	years	of	experience	as	a	psychotherapist,	teamwork	consultant,	speaker,

and	seminar	leader,	I’ve	found	that	it’s	much	more	rewarding	in	the	long	run	to
notice	and	soberly	accept	what	is	than	to	focus	so	much	of	our	attention	on	what
should	 be.	 Shoulds	 prevent	 us	 from	 seeing	 how	our	 life	 really	 is	—	and	 from
taking	 appropriate	 action.	 Shoulds	 are	 pretenses	 Telling	 yourself	 that	 you
“should	 be	more	 generous”	 is	 a	way	 of	 hoodwinking	 yourself	 and	 others	 into
thinking	that	you	want	to	be	generous.	Shoulds	also	justify	not	taking	action	in	a
situation	that	has	become	intolerable.	“He	shouldn’t	treat	me	that	way.”	So	you
focus	on	what	he	should	or	shouldn’t	do	instead	of	on	your	own	anger,	and	you
get	to	feel	wronged,	righteous,	and	stuck.	Shoulds	keep	you	from	owning	your
power	 to	 create	 the	 life	 you	want.	 They	 keep	 you	 in	 denial	 about	 your	 actual
feelings	and	situation.

Shoulds	prevent	us	from	seeing	how	our	life	really	is	—	and
from	taking	appropriate	action.	Shoulds	are	pretenses.

Getting	 Real	 serves	 as	 an	 antidote	 to	 the	 sort	 of	 self-deception	 that	 keeps
people	feeling	powerless	and	overwhelmed.	Once	you	stop	trying	to	get	reality
to	conform	to	your	ideas	and	ideals	and	let	yourself	see,	feel,	and	express	what
is,	you	will	feel	more	empowered	to	deal	effectively	with	your	present	situation.
You	won’t	be	stuck	anymore	or	clogged	up	with	unfinished	business.	You’ll	be
participating	 in	 this	 vast	 evolutionary	 dance	 called	 life.	 You’ll	 learn	 to	 trust
yourself	to	handle	whatever	comes	your	way	—	because	you	won’t	be	limited	by
your	ideas	about	what	should	happen.	You’ll	be	open	to	discovering	what	each
new	situation	brings	out	of	you.	You’ll	be	living	your	uniqueness.	Your	path	will
have	heart.

Once	you	stop	trying	to	get	reality	to	conform	to	your	ideas
and	ideals	and	let	yourself	see,	feel,	and	express	what	is,	you
will	feel	more	empowered	to	deal	effectively	with	your	present
situation.



In	this	process	you	may	fall	down	and	get	hurt	at	times,	like	when	you	were
learning	to	ride	a	bicycle.	But	when	you	get	up	and	dust	yourself	off,	you’ll	see
that	along	with	the	pain,	there	is	a	beautiful	new	experience	that	you	might	never
have	had	if	you	hadn’t	been	open	to	it.

You’re	Okay	Just	As	You	Are

From	 leading	Getting	Real	workshops,	 I	 have	 learned	 how	 free	 people	 feel
when	 they	notice,	 feel,	 and	 express	 their	 own	 inner	 experience,	 agreeing	 for	 a
day	 or	 two	 to	 set	 aside	 their	 normal	 conventions	 of	 politeness	 and
appropriateness.	Most	people	are	amazed	to	discover	that	they	feel	okay	just	as
they	are	—	warts	and	all.	My	purpose	in	writing	this	book	is	to	help	you	see	that
wherever	you	are	on	your	life	path,	you	may	as	well	relax	and	stop	trying	to	be
somewhere	else.	This	is	what	is.	I	enjoin	you	to	stop	fighting	what	is	so	that	you
can:

1.	relax	and	enjoy	yourself
2.	deal	realistically	and	creatively	with	the	truth	of	your	existence	(instead	of
waiting	to	take	action	until	you’re	“better”	or	until	someone	else	does	what
they’re	supposed	to	do)

3.	allow	yourself	to	be	seen	and	loved	(realizing	that	you	are	most	lovable
when	you	are	most	transparent)

4.	be	present	to	each	moment	of	your	life	(uninhibited	by	your	judging	and
comparing	mind	telling	you	that	you’re	not	enough)

5.	trust	yourself	to	“cross	future	bridges	when	you	come	to	them”	(rather	than
worrying	about	something	you	cannot	predict	or	control)

6.	feel	peaceful	and	self-accepting	(most	of	the	time)

The	 work	 of	 Getting	 Real	 is	 about	 paying	 attention	 to	 and	 communicating
about	what	you	notice	—	your	bodily	sensations,	your	 feelings,	your	 thoughts,
and	the	things	going	on	around	you.	When	I	use	the	term	work,	I	do	not	mean	to
imply	struggle.	I	do	not	mean	exerting.	I	do	not	mean	working	against	yourself.
If	you	notice	yourself	doing	these	things,	pay	attention.	Your	power	to	heal	any
tendency	to	struggle	against	yourself	lies	in	your	ability	to	be	aware	of	what	is,
without	praise	or	blame.	The	 simple	 act	of	being	aware	gives	you	 tremendous
freedom.	Your	 freedom	will	 be	 even	greater	 if	 you	 share	with	others	how	you



experience	 your	 awareness.	 I	 like	 to	 say	 that	 freedom’s	 just	 another	word	 for
nothing	 left	 to	 hide.	 I	 invite	 you	 to	 come	out	 of	 hiding	 and	 to	 reconnect	with
your	essential	freedom,	aliveness,	and	trust	in	yourself	and	others.

You	are	most	lovable	when	you	are	most	transparent.

To	 help	 create	 a	 playful,	 nonthreatening	 environment	 in	 which	 to	 practice
Getting	Real,	 I	 have	 invented	 two	 card	 games:	 I	 think	 it’s	 important	 to	 enjoy
ourselves	while	we’re	learning	and	working.	The	first	one,	the	Getting	Real	Card
Game,	can	be	played	with	several	friends	or	family	members.	It’s	a	great	way	to
have	fun	while	practicing	the	ten	truth	skills.	The	other,	called	the	Truth	at	Work
Card	 Game,	 is	 for	 people	 in	 the	 workplace.	 I	 have	 been	 using	 this	 game
successfully	in	conjunction	with	my	team-building	and	communication-training
business	 for	 several	 years.	 You	 can	 order	 these	 games	 from	me	 by	 using	 the
order	form	in	appendix	C.
I	also	lead	one-	and	two-day	Getting	Real	workshops	for	work	teams	and	the

general	 public	 and	 a	 two-day	 workshop	 for	 couples.	 If	 the	 playful	 work	 of
Getting	Real	speaks	to	you,	please	contact	me	for	more	information.	I	would	be
happy	to	come	to	your	location	to	offer	a	workshop	or	training	program.	Susan
Campbell,	4373	Hessel	Ct.,	Sebastopol,	CA	95472.	Phone:	 (707)	829-3646.	E-
mail:	 drsusan@susancampbell.com.	 Websites:	 www.susancampbell.com	 and
www.thegettingrealgame.com.

How	This	Book	Is	Organized

The	main	body	of	the	book,	chapters	2	through	11,	are	devoted	to	describing
the	ten	truth	skills	and	showing	you	how	and	when	to	use	 them.	Each	of	 these
chapters	 includes	 a	 self-assessment	quiz	 to	help	you	 see	how	comfortable	you
are	in	the	domain	of	the	truth	skill	being	considered.	The	chapters	also	contain
stories	 of	 real	 people	 (whose	 names	 and	 identifying	details	 have	been	 altered)
who	have	learned	to	use	the	skills	successfully,	as	well	as	exercises	that	you	can
do	 alone	 or	with	 a	 partner	 to	 give	 you	 practice	 using	 each	 skill.	 Each	 chapter
concludes	 with	 a	 short	 summation	 of	 key	 points	 under	 the	 heading	 “In	 a
Nutshell.”
The	appendices	at	the	end	of	the	book	contain	further	resources	to	support	the

http://drsusan@susancampbell.com
http://www.susancampbell.com
http://www.thegettingrealgame.com


process	of	Getting	Real.	In	appendix	A,	you	will	find	a	list	of	related	books	and
seminars.	Appendix	B	contains	 the	communication	guidelines	 that	 I	use	 in	my
seminars	 with	 instructions	 on	 how	 you	 can	 start	 your	 own	 group	 using	 these
guidelines	 them	 and	 the	 Getting	 Real	 Card	 Game.	 Appendix	 C	 includes
descriptions	 of	 the	 two	 interactive	 card	 games	 I	 have	 created	 that	 you	 can
purchase	 and	 play	 with	 your	 friends	 or	 coworkers.	 It	 also	 contains	 ordering
information	and	a	page	that	you	can	use	for	ordering.



CHAPTER	1
HOW	TO	STOP	BEING	RIGHT
AND	START	BEING	REAL

Have	you	ever
•	been	bored	listening	to	someone	but	acted	interested?
•	pretended	to	like	someone	more	than	you	really	did?
•	pretended	to	like	someone	less	than	you	really	did?
•	had	trouble	admitting	you	didn’t	know	something	you’re	supposed	to	know?
•	had	trouble	admitting	you	were	wrong?
•	had	difficulty	asking	for	what	you	wanted?
•	acted	happy	when	you	felt	sad?
•	had	difficulty	admitting	you	were	attracted	to	someone	until	you	found	out
how	they	felt	about	you?

•	had	a	problem	saying	no	or	marking	your	boundaries?
•	had	trouble	telling	your	sexual	partner	that	you’re	not	satisfied?
•	reacted	defensively	when	you	thought	you	were	being	criticized?
•	had	difficulty	expressing	your	anger,	jealousy,	or	hurt?
•	had	trouble	expressing	your	love,	caring,	or	vulnerability?
•	avoided	telling	someone	something	that	you	feared	might	be	hurtful?

If	you	answered	yes	 to	many	of	 these	questions,	rest	assured	that	you’re	not
alone:	 I	 ask	hundreds	of	people	 these	questions	during	speeches	and	seminars,
and	 nearly	 everyone	 answers	 yes	 to	most	 of	 them.	Yes,	 we	 all	 lie,	 sugarcoat,
pretend,	or	withhold.	Why?	The	most	common	reasons	people	give	are

•	to	avoid	hurting	people’s	feelings
•	to	avoid	looking	foolish
•	to	avoid	conflict,	disagreement,	or	feeling	anger



•	to	ensure	that	things	turn	out	right
•	to	avoid	feeling	out	of	control

We	 lie	 to	 avoid	 whatever	 we	 perceive	 as	 dangerous	—	 to	 our	 ego,	 to	 our
comfort,	 to	our	safety.	Most	of	all	we	 lie	because	our	sense	of	safety	and	self-
esteem	depends	on	our	feeling	in	control,	in	control	of	how	other	people	react	to
us,	of	whether	we	appear	smart	or	foolish,	of	whether	we’ll	get	what	we	want.

Getting	Real	at	Work

I	was	 giving	my	 first	 coaching	 session	 to	 an	 executive	 from	 a	 Fortune	 100
company.	We	were	meeting	to	go	over	the	results	of	a	survey	he	had	given	his
employees	asking	for	their	feedback	about	his	effectiveness	as	a	leader.	As	soon
as	we	sat	down,	he	disclosed,	“I	haven’t	 looked	at	 the	results	of	 the	survey.”	 I
had	an	immediate	reaction.	I	was	not	pleased!	The	previous	week	we	had	agreed
that	 both	 of	 us	 would	 study	 the	 results	 of	 the	 survey	 in	 preparation	 for	 this
meeting.	 My	 body	 felt	 flushed	 and	 hot.	 I	 felt	 a	 mixture	 of	 anger	 and
disappointment.	I	was	saying	to	myself,	“I	wasn’t	expecting	this.	I	don’t	want	to
have	 this	 meeting	 if	 he’s	 not	 prepared.”	 Instead	 I	 mumbled,	 “How	 come?
Weren’t	you	 interested	 in	what	your	people	had	 to	 say	about	you?”	He	smiled
sheepishly,	looked	down	at	the	floor,	and	said	something	about	having	too	much
on	his	plate.	So	I	feigned	sympathy.

Most	of	all	we	lie	because	our	sense	of	safety	and	self-esteem
depends	on	our	feeling	in	control

Fortunately,	 at	 that	 point	 in	 the	 conversation,	 I	 felt	 the	 urge	 to	 use	 the
restroom,	so	I	excused	myself.	Standing	at	the	sink	in	the	women’s	room,	I	gave
myself	time	to	get	present	to	what	I	was	experiencing.	I	took	a	few	deep	breaths
and	went	back	 to	our	conference	 room.	 I	 looked	my	client	 in	 the	eye	and	 told
him,	 “Leo,	 I’m	 feeling	 angry	 and	disappointed	 that	 you	didn’t	 read	what	 your
people	wrote	about	you.”	As	soon	as	I	said	those	words,	I	knew	I	was	going	to
be	 okay.	 I	 felt	 a	 big	 surge	 of	 relief	 in	 my	 body	 and	 renewed	 clarity	 in	 my
thoughts.	I	waited	for	his	response.	He	sat	there	for	several	seconds,	just	looking
at	me.	 Then	 he	 said	 something	 I	 didn’t	 expect:	 “Thank	 you.	 I	 needed	 to	 hear



that.”	We	both	heaved	a	big	 sigh	of	 relief	 as	 I	 exclaimed,	 “Well,	 now	 that	we
have	that	out	of	the	way,	shall	we	get	to	work?”
My	behavior	during	the	first	part	of	the	meeting	was	typical	of	so	many	of	us.

We	 try	 to	 act	 in	 control	 instead	 of	 admitting	 that	 we’re	 upset	 or	 befuddled.
Instead	 of	 sharing	 our	 feelings	 and	 thoughts,	 we	 try	 to	 ensure	 a	 predictable
outcome	 (I	 wanted	 him	 to	 like	 me,	 and	 I	 wanted	 the	 meeting	 to	 proceed
smoothly).	We	communicate	with	the	intent	to	control	rather	than	with	the	intent
to	 relate.	 But	 until	 we	 take	 a	 risk	 and	 share	 authentically,	 nothing	 real	 can
happen.	We’re	 like	 actors	 reading	 from	a	 script.	When	people	 throw	away	 the
script	and	show	up	in	the	moment,	suddenly	a	lot	of	creative	energy	is	released,
and	something	can	get	accomplished.

When	people	throw	away	the	cript	and	show	up	in	the
moment,suddenly	a	lot	of	creative	energy	is	released,	and
something	can	get	accomplished.

As	my	meeting	with	Leo	showed	me,	honest	expression	of	feelings	also	helps
to	clear	away	the	fog	 that	clouds	our	perception	of	what	 is	—	especially	when
we	 express	 something	we	have	been	withholding	 or	 trying	 not	 to	 think	 about.
Once	 I	 expressed	my	withheld	 anger,	 I	was	 able	 to	 release	 those	 feelings	 and
could	then	give	Leo	much	more	of	my	attention.

New	Human	Capacities

In	the	mid-1990s	I	conducted	a	three-year	research	study	of	the	“new	human
capacities”	 that	 people	 need	 to	 develop	 to	 survive	 and	 thrive	 in	 a	 world	 of
tumultuous	 change	 and	 information	 overload.	 Based	 on	 a	 survey	 of
approximately	 five	 hundred	 people,	 the	 research	 demonstrated	 that	 about	 80
percent	 of	 the	 average	 person’s	 communications	 are	 geared	 toward	 controlling
things	 that	 are	 actually	 beyond	 the	 person’s	 control:	 a	 huge	 waste	 of	 human
energy.
More	often	than	not	the	truth	of	a	situation	doesn’t	conform	to	our	ideas	about

how	things	should	be.	In	the	example	above,	I	thought	Leo	should	have	read	the
survey	 results.	Where	did	 that	get	me?	Well,	 it	got	me	behaving	 in	a	way	 that
was	disconnected	 from	both	 the	 truth	of	 the	situation	and	 the	 truth	of	my	own



feelings.	 The	 truth	 is	 often	 more	 confusing,	 paradoxical,	 uncomfortable,	 or
messy	 than	we	might	wish	 it	 to	be.	 It	 cannot	be	 controlled.	The	people	 in	my
study	 who	 experienced	 the	 greatest	 number	 of	 painful	 unexpected	 surprises
(such	as	job	loss,	divorce,	and	alienation	from	their	grown	children)	were	those
who	demonstrated	the	highest	need	for	control.	It	seems	that	the	more	you	try	to
get	reality	to	fit	within	your	comfort	zone,	the	more	unprepared	you	are	to	deal
with	a	world	full	of	surprise,	complexity,	and	change.	Likewise,	if	we	persist	in
trying	 to	get	our	relationships	 to	conform	to	our	expectations	 instead	of	 letting
them	be	 how	 they	 actually	 are,	we	may	miss	 important	 opportunities	 to	 know
ourselves	and	others	more	deeply.
When	I	was	in	high	school,	my	family’s	dinner	conversations	often	centered

on	 my	 dad’s	 frustrations	 with	 upper	 management	 in	 the	 company	 where	 he
worked.	Dad	was	a	mid-level	manager	in	a	company	that	manufactured	and	sold
business	 calculating	machines	 in	 an	 era	 when	 better-faster-cheaper	 computers
were	 just	 about	 to	 arrive	 on	 the	market.	My	 dad	was	 pretty	 certain	 that	 if	 his
company	didn’t	start	listening	to	customers	and	giving	them	what	they	wanted,
the	 company	would	 fold.	 Every	 night	 I	would	 listen	 to	Dad	 ranting	 about	 his
bosses	—	what	they	should	do	if	they	had	any	brains	and	what	he	would	do	if	he
were	leading	the	company.
I	would	 often	 ask	 him,	 “Instead	 of	 telling	us,	 can’t	 you	 tell	 them	 what	 you

think?	Wouldn’t	they	want	to	hear	what	you	have	to	say?”
“Oh	no,	 they’d	 just	 say	 ‘don’t	be	 so	negative.’	And	 then	 I’d	 feel	even	more

frustrated.”
Reflecting	on	 these	conversations,	 I	now	view	my	dad’s	behavior	as	a	good

example	of	withholding	true	feelings	and	thoughts	to	maintain	a	sense	of	control:
he	had	it	all	figured	out.	He	knew	how	his	bosses	should	be	and	how	they	would
react	 to	his	 ideas.	By	staying	silent,	he	stayed	 in	control.	He	never	had	 to	 risk
being	disagreed	with,	 criticized,	 or	 ignored.	He	got	 to	 stay	 right	where	he	 felt
comfortable	—	wronged,	but	righteous	—	to	the	very	end	when	the	company	did
go	under	and	he	could	say,	“I	told	you	so.”
Staying	 in	 control,	 or	 at	 least	 avoiding	 feeling	 not	 in	 control,	 is	 a	 powerful

motivator,	 to	 be	 sure.	 Recently,	 however,	 controloriented	 communication	 (or
lack	of	communication,	as	 in	Dad’s	case)	has	begun	 to	 fall	out	of	 favor.	More
and	more	people	are	waking	up	to	the	fact	that	trying	to	play	it	safe	and	to	avoid
unwanted	 outcomes	 has	 a	 way	 of	 sneaking	 up	 on	 you	 and	 biting	 you	 in	 the
backside.	Those	very	things	you	try	to	avoid	get	you	in	the	end,	so	to	speak.	My
dad	 was	 trying	 to	 avoid	 the	 unwanted	 outcome	 of	 being	 without	 a	 job.	 And



where	 did	 that	 behavior	 get	 him?	 He	 wound	 up	 losing	 his	 job	 and	 his	 self-
respect.	He	later	disclosed,	“At	least	if	I	had	told	them	what	I	thought,	I’d	have
my	self-respect	intact,	whether	they	listened	or	not.	I	wish	I’d	known	then	what	I
know	now.”
In	conducting	my	study,	I	talked	to	many	people	who	have	begun	to	recognize

the	 price	 they	 have	 paid	 for	 trying	 to	 control	 things	 that	 really	 are	 not	within
their	 control.	 Because	 of	 the	 evolutionary	 forces	 of	 information	 overload	 and
rapid,	unpredictable	change,	we	now	need	to	become	less	attached	to	how	things
should	turn	out	and	communicate	more	about	what	is	actually	going	on	—	even
if	doing	so	is	uncomfortable	or	threatening.	Doing	so	requires	that	we	take	our
prejudices,	 preconceptions,	 and	 shoulds	 lightly	 so	 that	 we	 can	 accurately
perceive	the	feedback	we	get	rather	than	having	our	perceptions	clouded	by	what
we	expect,	what	we	fear,	or	what	we	think	should	be	happening.	I	call	this	new
orientation	toward	communication	relating.	Relating	is	how	you	get	real.

Relating	Versus	Controlling

Control-oriented	 communication	 is	 geared	 toward	 ensuring	 a	 predictable
result.	 It	 is	 the	 ego-mind’s	 way	 of	 protecting	 us	 from	 feeling	 anxious	 or
uncomfortable	when	facing	an	unexpected	or	unknown	outcome.	The	ego-mind
is	that	part	of	us	that	likes	to	feel	 in	control.	Many	of	us	don’t	trust	 that,	 if	we
don’t	get	the	result	we	were	hoping	for,	we’ll	be	resourceful	enough	to	come	up
with	a	“plan	B.”
When	we	 relate	we	value	what	 is	 over	what	 should	 or	 could	 be.	When	you

relate,	as	opposed	 to	when	you	control,	you	speak	 the	 truth	of	what	you	 think,
feel,	and	notice	as	a	way	of	sharing	information	and	making	emotional	contact
—	 and	 not	 as	 a	 way	 of	 getting	 a	 particular	 outcome.	 You	 speak	 your	 truth
without	 knowing	 how	 this	 truth	will	 be	 received.	When	 I	 told	 Leo	 that	 I	was
angry	and	disappointed,	I	was	taking	a	risk.	He	could	have	told	me	I	was	being
disrespectful	and	walked	out	on	me.	I	was	willing	to	take	that	chance,	because	I
trusted	that	whatever	happened,	I’d	be	okay.	I	also	knew	that	if	I	wasn’t	truthful
with	 myself	 and	 with	 Leo,	 all	 further	 communication	 between	 us	 would	 be
compromised	and	that	our	meeting	would	not	be	very	productive.

The	Ten	Truth	Skills



This	book	is	a	kind	of	primer	for	the	practice	of	conscious,	deeply	contacting
communication	—	the	type	of	communication	that	pushes	you	closer	to	that	edge
of	aliveness	where	you	 trust	yourself	enough	 to	 speak	your	 truth	even	without
being	sure	of	how	you	will	be	received,	where	you	are

To	really	experience	true	contact	with	another	person,	you
must	enter	a	realm	of	uncertainty	together.

To	really	experience	true	contact	with	another	person,	you	must	enter	a	realm
of	uncertainty	together.	To	help	you	gain	the	courage	and	confidence	to	live	this
way,	 in	this	book	I	describe	ten	essential	 life	skills,	which	I	call	 truth	skills.	In
chapters	 2	 through	 11,	 I	 discuss	 each	 of	 these	 ten	 truth	 skills	 in	 detail.	 I	 will
outline	them	here	for	you	briefly.
1.	Experiencing	 what	 is.	 When	 I	 use	 the	 words	what	 is,	 I	 am	 referring	 to

whatever	 is	 actually	going	on	 in	 the	present	moment	—	 in	your	body,	 in	your
mind,	 and	 in	 your	 environment.	By	 noticing	 and	 feeling	what	 is,	 you	 learn	 to
distinguish	 between	what	 you	 actually	 experience	 in	 your	 body	 and	 emotions
from	what	your	mind	thinks,	 judges,	expects,	or	believes	should	be	happening.
This	 practice	 will	 help	 you	 communicate	 about	 your	 current	 reality	 more
accurately	and	honestly.	It	will	keep	you	connected	to	the	energy	of	being	alive,
thereby	 training	 you	 not	 to	 depend	 so	much	 on	 external	 results,	 such	 as	what
others	think	of	you,	for	your	sense	of	well-being.
2.	Being	transparent.	Self-disclosure,	or	what	I	am	calling	being	transparent,

is	 the	 ability	 to	 reveal	 to	 another	 person	what	 you	have	done	or	what	 you	 are
sensing,	feeling,	thinking,	or	saying	to	yourself	at	the	moment.	When	you	share
your	 thoughts,	 sensations,	 feelings,	 even	 your	 judgments	 “in	 the	 interest	 of
transparency,”	you	are	 less	 apt	 to	get	 caught	up	 in	 the	 illusion	of	 control.	The
motive	behind	your	self-expression	is	just	that	—	self-expression.	It	is	not	about
trying	 to	 get	 people	 to	 change.	 As	 a	 result,	 your	 expression	 is	 less	 likely	 to
trigger	a	defensive	reaction	in	them.	Letting	yourself	be	seen	by	others	is	also	an
important	aid	to	seeing	yourself	more	honestly.	It	is	harder	to	fool	yourself	when
you	are	going	public	about	who	you	are.
3.	Noticing	your	intent.	Communicating	with	the	intent	to	control	the	outcome

of	 a	 situation	 represents	 the	 ego-mind’s	 efforts	 to	 protect	 you.	 The	 intent	 to
control,	or	 to	self-protect,	does	have	 its	place,	especially	 if	you	are	 in	physical
danger.	However,	most	people	communicate	with	the	intent	to	control	rather	than



to	relate	 far	more	 than	 they	need	 to.	 If	 you	 really	want	 to	 see	 the	 reality	 of	 a
situation	or	to	connect	with	someone	emotionally,	you	need	to	allow	yourself	to
be	 open	 to	 the	 possibilities	 of	 each	moment	—	 spontaneous	 and	 unrehearsed.
You	need	to	relate	more	and	control	less.
4.	Welcoming	feedback.	Welcoming	feedback	is	another	way	to	be	present	to

what	is.	It	means	being	attuned	to	what	is	happening	around	you	each	moment.
When	 you	 welcome	 feedback,	 you	 are	 actively	 curious	 about	 how	 others	 are
affected	by	your	actions.	You	ask,	“How	are	you	with	what	I	just	did?”	or	“What
is	your	response	 to	what	I’m	saying?”	Asking	for	feedback	keeps	 the	 two-way
flow	 of	 conversation	 going,	 an	 essential	 ingredient	 of	 relating.	 The	 ability	 to
notice	others’	verbal	and	nonverbal	feedback	is	how	you	learn	from	experience.
You	do	or	say	something,	then	you	notice	what	happens.	In	this	way	you	can	see
whether	your	behavior	serves	your	needs,	aims,	and	values.
5.	Asserting	what	you	want	and	don’t	want.	Asserting	what	you	want	affirms

your	 right	 to	want	what	you	want	—	even	 if	you	 imagine	 it’s	an	unreasonable
demand	 or	 that	 there’s	 little	 chance	 of	 getting	 it.	 This	 skill	 also	 helps	 you
become	less	attached	to	getting	everything	you	ask	for,	since	each	request	won’t
carry	such	a	heavy	load.	When	you	are	free	and	fluent	with	your	requests,	you
don’t	expect	to	get	everything	you	ask	for.	But	when	you	save	up	your	requests
for	“the	really	important	things,”	each	request	carries	more	significance	than	is
realistic.	 Asking	 freely,	 instead	 of	 inhibiting	 yourself,	 keeps	 your	 energy
flowing.	You	are	saying	yes	to	yourself,	no	matter	how	another	person	responds
to	Asking	freely	instead	of	inhibiting	your	wants.

Asserting	what	you	want	affirms	your	right	to	want	what	you
want	—	even	if	you	imagine	it’s	an	unreasonable	demand	or
that	there’s	little	chance	of	getting	it.

It	 is	also	very	important	to	let	people	know	about	what	you	don’t	want.	You
need	 to	be	 able	 to	 refuse	 to	do,	 receive,	 tolerate,	 or	 speak	 about	 something,	 if
that	is	your	honest	response.	This	kind	of	asserting	may	result	in	the	other	person
being	disappointed,	frustrated,	or	angry;	but	 if	a	relationship	is	 to	be	authentic,
there	needs	to	be	space	for	people	to	experience	their	full	range	of	feelings	and
to	have	those	feelings	be	okay.



Asking	freely,	instead	of	inhibiting	yourself,	keeps	your
energy	flowing.	You	are	saying	yes	to	yourself	no	matter	how
another	person	responds	to	your	wants.

6.	Taking	back	projections.	Often	what	you	“see”	in	another	person	is	actually
a	mirror	of	something	in	yourself	that	you’re	uncomfortable	with.	When	a	timid
person	 is	 put	 off	 by	 someone	 aggressive,	 perhaps	 she	 is	 disowning	 her	 own
“aggressiveness,”	that	is,	her	ability	to	stand	up	for	herself.	When	a	dominating
person	is	bothered	by	a	 timid,	 fearful	person,	perhaps	he	 is	not	acknowledging
his	own	 fearfulness.	The	phenomenon	of	projection	has	been	 recognized	 since
ancient	 times.	 In	 the	 Sermon	 on	 the	 Mount	 in	 the	 Bible,	 Christ	 urged	 his
followers	 to	 be	 mindful	 of	 noticing	 the	 speck	 in	 their	 neighbor’s	 eye	 while
failing	to	notice	the	log	in	their	own.	Becoming	aware	of	projections	helps	you
to	season	your	judgments	with	some	humility.	It	can	also	help	you	to	remember
that	 other	 people’s	 judgments	 about	 you	 are	 as	much	 (or	more)	 about	 them	as
they	 are	 about	 you.	 And	 perhaps	 most	 important,	 this	 kind	 of	 awareness	 can
show	you	where	your	life	energy	is	blocked	or	stuck	in	a	pattern	so	that	you	can
get	it	flowing	again.
7.	Revising	an	earlier	statement.	We	can	learn	to	be	flexible	enough	to	change

our	minds	and	to	let	someone	know	that	our	feelings	have	changed.	You	may	at
times	notice	that	you	no	longer	feel	something	after	you	have	expressed	it;	you
may	realize	hours	or	days	after	you	have	shared	something	that	it	was	a	lie;	or
you	 may	 discover	 a	 deeper	 level	 of	 your	 feelings.	 In	 such	 situations,	 it’s
important	 to	 give	 yourself	 permission	 to	 come	 back	 to	 the	 person	with	whom
you’ve	communicated	to	clear	things	up.	Also	known	as	“going	out	and	coming
in	again,”	this	truth	skill	can	help	you	deal	with	changing	your	mind,	clearing	up
a	 misunderstanding,	 or	 making	 up	 after	 an	 argument.	 It	 gives	 you	 a	 way	 to
continually	forgive	(or	seek	forgiveness)	and	begin	again.
8.	Holding	differences.	Holding	differences	refers	to	your	ability	to	have	your

own	 viewpoint	while	 at	 the	 same	 time	 being	 open	 to	 hearing	 and	 considering
differing	views.	Openly	listening	to	opposing	views	need	not	interfere	with	your
ability	 to	 know	 what	 you	 feel	 or	 think	 about	 the	 matter.	 Holding	 differences
helps	you	handle	more	complexity.	You	think	in	terms	of	both/and,	not	either/or.
This	 practice	 helps	 you	 see	 the	 relationships	 between	 things	 that	may	 appear
separate	or	mutually	exclusive.	As	a	result,	you	become	much	more	effective	in
situations	 involving	 conflict,	 negotiation,	 group	 decision	making,	 and	 problem



solving.	 It	 enables	 you	 to	 experience	 the	 principle	 of	 mutual	 benefit	 in	 your
relationships	—	the	fact	 that	any	action	that	harms	a	part	harms	the	whole	and
that	any	action	 that	heals	 the	collective	heals	 the	 individual.	 I’m	not	going	 too
far	out	on	a	limb	to	say	that	world	peace	might	actually	be	possible	if	everyone
on	earth	mastered	this	truth	skill.

Holding	differences	helps	you	see	the	relationships	between
things	that	may	appear	separate	or	mutually	exclusive.

9.	Sharing	mixed	emotions.	When	you	 are	 ambivalent,	 confused,	 or	 “of	 two
minds,”	 go	 ahead	 and	 express	 this	 fact.	You	may	 be	 pulled	 equally	 in	 two	 or
more	directions.	Or	you	may	feel	primarily	one	way	(in	your	“foreground”)	but
have	 a	 background	 feeling	 that’s	 different.	 The	 ability	 to	 express	 complex
feelings	 is	 especially	 useful	when	 you	 are	 angry	 about	what	 someone	 did	 but
also	 appreciate	 the	 person’s	 good	 intentions	 or	 when	 you	 want	 to	 express	 a
strong	 feeling	 to	 clear	 up	 unfinished	 business	 but	 at	 the	 same	 time	 feel
concerned	 about	 the	 other	 person’s	 reaction.	 It’s	 okay	 to	 be	 both	 angry	 and
afraid,	 both	 resentful	 and	 appreciative,	 both	 eager	 and	 reluctant.	 This	 skill
teaches	you	 to	 let	 go	of	your	 ideas	 and	 shoulds	 about	being	 consistent	 so	 that
you	can	experience	whatever	shows	up	in	your	awareness.
10.	Embracing	the	silence.	Whenever	you	step	fully	into	the	present	moment,

you	let	go	of	the	need	to	know	how	things	will	turn	out.	Your	attention	is	on	the
only	 thing	 you	 can	 know	 —	 what	 is	 happening	 now.	 The	 most	 authentic
response	 to	 a	 situation	 arises	 from	 a	 place	 of	 spaciousness,	 of	 silence,	 of	 not
knowing.	You	can’t	plan	everything	 in	 advance.	You	can’t	know	what	 another
person	will	do	until	she	does	it.	If	you	can’t	tolerate	not	knowing	and	the	feeling
of	helplessness	 that	 sometimes	accompanies	 it,	 you	will	miss	much	of	what	 is
happening	 in	 the	moment.	 Silence	 is	 your	 connection	 to	 the	Source,	 the	 place
from	which	new	creation	springs	forth.

Using	the	Ten	Truth	Skills	As	an	Awareness	Practice

These	 ten	 truth	skills	constitute	an	awareness	practice	—	a	way	of	speaking
and	listening	that	helps	you	to	see,	accept,	and	deal	creatively	with	whatever	is.
As	you	work	with	the	ten	skills,	your	ability	to	be	present	to	what	is	will	grow.	I



use	 the	 terms	 whatever	 is	 and	 what	 is	 as	 synonyms	 for	 what	 you	 could
potentially	be	aware	of	in	any	given	moment.	Of	all	 the	sights,	sounds,	smells,
sensations,	and	vibes	surrounding	you,	how	much	are	you	able	to	perceive	and
vibrate	with?	You	can	only	be	as	authentic	as	you	are	self-aware.

You	can	only	be	as	authentic	as	you	are	self-aware.

What	 is	 often	 stands	 in	 sharp	 contrast	 to	what	 you	wish	were	 happening	 or
think	should	be	happening.	For	example,	let’s	say	a	friend	doesn’t	call	when	he
says	he	will.	That’s	what	 is	—	he	 said	he’d	 call	 and	he	didn’t.	Do	you	notice
what	you	feel?	Will	you	listen	to	what	he	says	later	 in	explanation?	Or	do	you
interrupt	 your	 capacity	 to	 feel	 and	 to	 listen	 to	 your	 friend	 by	 immediately
judging	his	behavior	or	imagining	why	he	didn’t	call?
When	your	attention	is	on	your	mind	chatter	(thoughts,	inferences,	judgments,

and	interpretations),	you	are	not	present	to	what	is	happening	here	and	now,	so
you	cannot	be	real.	You	become	more	present,	and	 therefore	more	real,	as	you
peel	away	the	layers	of	automatic	patterns	(such	as	judging	or	explaining	others’
behavior)	 and	 conditioned	 beliefs	 (about	 how	 safe	 it	 is	 to	 speak	 honestly).	As
you	 shed	 these	 layers,	 you	 will	 reveal	 your	 authentic	 self.	 Honest
communication	 is	 the	vehicle	 for	 this	process.	 If	you’re	being	 real,	or	 relating,
you	might	say	something	like,	“I	notice	my	jaw	is	tense.	I	feel	angry	at	you	for
saying	 you’d	 call	 and	 then	 not	 calling.”	Real	 communication	 focuses	 on	 your
sensations,	 feelings,	 and	 observations,	 bringing	 you	 into	 the	 present	 moment.
This	 kind	 of	 communication	 allows	 for	 something	 real,	 unplanned,	 and
potentially	surprising	and	creative	to	occur	between	you	and	another	person.

When	your	attention	is	on	your	mind	chatter	(thoughts,
inferences,	judgments,	and	interpretations),	you	are	not
present	to	what	is	happening	here	and	now,	so	you	cannot	be
real.

Being	honest	is	a	vital	part	of	any	awareness	practice.	When	you	express	what
you	 are	 honestly	 thinking,	 feeling,	 and	 wanting	 with	 the	 intention	 of	 relating
(rather	than	of	bolstering	your	position),	you	come	to	see	that	who	you	are	is	not



defined	by	your	thoughts,	your	feelings,	your	story,	or	your	position.	You	come
to	experience	yourself	as	a	human	being	whose	experience	of	life	is	constantly
changing	 and	who	 is	 okay	 regardless	 of	what	 you	 feel.	This	 profound	 shift	 in
your	identity	is	the	reward	for	practicing	Getting	Real.	You	learn	to	participate	in
life	instead	of	trying	to	control	it.

You	learn	to	participate	in	life	instead	of	trying	to	control	it.



CHAPTER	2
EXPERIENCING	WHAT

IS	TO	GET	WHERE	YOU	NEED	TO
GO,	BE	WHERE	YOU	ARE

“I’ll	 probably	 see	 you	 sometime	 over	 the	 weekend,	 Mom.”	 And	 with	 that,
Mona’s	seventeen-year-old	son	Todd	hopped	in	his	car	and	drove	off	 to	stay	at
his	 best	 friend’s	 home	 for	 the	 next	 few	 days.	Mona’s	 heart	 felt	 heavy	 as	 she
thought,	“Todd’s	been	spending	every	free	minute	over	at	Jason’s	house.	I	never
see	him	anymore.	I	feel	so	sad.	And	I’m	jealous!	He	likes	being	at	the	Murphy’s
place	better	than	he	likes	being	home.”	Then,	as	her	heart	began	to	really	ache,
another	thought	entered	her	mind,	“I	shouldn’t	be	feeling	this.	I	should	be	happy
that	my	son	has	good	 friends	 like	 the	Murphys.	What	kind	of	a	mother	would
want	to	possess	her	own	son	—	who’s	almost	grown-up,	anyway?”
This	type	of	ambivalence	was	familiar	to	Mona:	she’d	feel	something	and	then

tell	herself	she	shouldn’t	be	feeling	it.	Recognizing	a	pattern	she	didn’t	want	to
keep	repeating,	she	decided	that	this	time	she	would	just	let	herself	feel	what	she
felt,	noticing	when	she	had	the	urge	to	cut	off	her	feelings	or	talk	herself	out	of
them.
So	 she	 sat	 down,	 felt	 the	pain	 in	her	gut,	 and	began	 to	 cry.	She	 sobbed	out

loud	for	about	five	minutes,	allowing	her	sobs	to	get	deeper	and	louder	at	some
points	and	quieter	at	others.	As	 she	cried	and	 felt	her	pain,	which	 she	 thought
was	about	the	loss	of	her	son,	a	memory	began	to	emerge:	it	was	the	memory	of
another	 loss	when	she	was	about	 ten	years	old,	 the	memory	of	 losing	her	dog.
Woofer	 had	 been	 a	 puppy	when	 she	 got	 him.	 She	 had	 studied	 dog	 obedience
training	 and	had	 trained	 him	herself	 to	 sit,	 roll	 over,	 heel,	 and	beg.	Then,	 just
about	the	time	she	and	Woofer	were	ready	to	attend	their	first	dog	show	together,
a	 truck	 struck	 and	 killed	 him	 as	 he	was	 lying	 in	 the	 driveway	 just	waking	 up
from	a	nap.	Mona	was	in	the	adjacent	yard	at	the	time	and	was	the	first	one	on
the	scene.	As	she	held	her	dead	dog	and	wailed	out	her	pain	for	all	to	hear,	her



father,	not	realizing	what	had	happened,	yelled	out	the	window,	“Shut	up,	Mona.
Stop	being	such	a	crybaby!”
At	 that	 moment,	 she	 stopped	 crying	 abruptly,	 wiped	 her	 tears	 on	 her	 shirt

sleeve,	and	went	in	the	house	to	tell	her	mother	what	happened.	She	got	plenty
of	sympathy	from	everyone	in	the	family,	including	her	dad.	But	strangely,	she
had	never	cried	over	the	incident	again,	until	now,	twenty-five	years	later,	sitting
in	her	kitchen	feeling	the	“loss”	of	her	teenage	son.
When	this	memory	came	up,	she	started	crying	all	over	again,	but	now	it	was

no	longer	about	Todd,	and	she	was	no	longer	stopping	herself	with	thoughts	of
“you	 shouldn’t.”	 She	 continued	 to	 sob	 for	 about	 ten	 minutes.	 Each	 wave	 of
sobbing	took	her	deeper	into	the	memory.	She	imagined	herself	holding	her	dog
in	her	arms	and	 saying	goodbye	 to	him.	She	 imagined	yelling	at	her	 father,	 “I
resent	 you	 for	 telling	me	 to	 shut	 up.	You	 shut	 up!”	 She	 comforted	 herself	 and
told	herself	that	just	because	her	dad	said	to	stop	crying,	she	didn’t	need	to	obey
—	if	this	was	not	her	truth.	Dad	could	be	pretty	ignorant	sometimes,	she	thought.
And	then	a	sense	of	relief	and	relaxation	washed	over	her	entire	body.	She	lay
down	on	the	floor	and	let	herself	sink	into	the	rug.	As	her	breathing	slowed	and
her	body	tingled	with	excitement,	she	felt	more	whole	—	as	if	a	part	of	her	that
was	lost	had	come	back	home	for	good.	She	saw	that	her	current	pain	originated
from	 an	 earlier	 experience	 of	 cutting	 off	 her	 feelings	 so	 that	 she	wouldn’t	 be
called	a	crybaby.	She	had	never	allowed	herself	 to	grieve	 the	earlier	 loss,	so	 it
was	still	interfering	with	her	ability	to	be	present.
As	you	put	yourself	in	Mona’s	place,	does	any	of	this	scenario	feel	familiar?

Do	you	ever	start	to	feel	something	and	then	try	to	avoid	feeling	it?	Maybe	you
tell	yourself	that	the	feeling	is	not	appropriate,	not	reasonable,	that	it	won’t;	do
any	good,	or	any	number	of	other	self-suppressing	messages.	But	as	long	as	you
avoid	experiencing	whatever	is	calling	out	to	be	experienced,	you	will	not	heal.
A	part	of	you	will	be	lost.	Mona	allowed	herself	to	go	into	what	she	was	feeling,
allowing	 it	 to	 reveal	 to	 her	 the	 origins	 of	 her	 pain	 about	 losing	 her	 son.	 She
allowed	herself	 to	experience	what	 is	 and	discovered	 that	 self-suppression,	not
the	current	situation,	was	at	the	root	of	her	pain.	When	she	allowed	her	energy	to
flow	naturally,	expressing	feelings	that	had	been	shut	off	long	ago,	she	felt	more
relaxed	and	peaceful.

As	long	as	you	avoid	experiencing	whatever	is	calling	out	to
be	experienced,	you	will	not	heal.	A	part	of	you	will	be	lost.



Practicing	 truth	 skill	 #1,	 experiencing	 what	 is,	 doesn’t	 always	 look	 this
dramatic.	 Sometimes	we	 just	 feel	 irritated	 by	 something	 someone	 did	 or	 said.
But	any	time	you	feel	something	and	then	notice	yourself	trying	to	avoid	feeling
it,	 it’s	probably	more	 significant	 than	 it	 appears.	Most	of	us	 are	vigilant	 about
avoiding	 painful	 feelings.	 So	we	must	 become	 equally	 vigilant	 at	 noticing	 the
control	patterns	of	our	minds	—	because	to	feel	what	we	actually	feel,	perhaps
something	that	we	weren’t	strong	enough	to	let	ourselves	fully	experience	in	the
past,	allows	us	the	possibility	of	becoming	real.

Self-Assessment	Quiz

In	this	chapter	and	in	the	next	nine,	I	will	introduce	each	truth	skill	by	asking
you	 to	 take	 a	 short	 quiz.	 Each	 quiz	 is	 designed	 to	 help	 you	 look	 honestly	 at
yourself,	with	reference	to	the	truth	skill	covered	in	that	chapter.	The	following
short	quiz	will	help	you	to	assess	your	ability	to	experience	what	is.
On	a	scale	from	1	to	5	(with	1	being	not	very	much	and	5	being	very	much),

how	much	does	each	statement	apply	to	you?

1.	I	often	find	myself	thinking	about	what	I	should	do	or	should	have	done.
2.	I	like	to	think	of	reasons	for	or	theories	about	why	people	do	what	they	do.
3.	I	have	an	inner	critic	that	won’t	quit.
4.	I	often	find	myself	comparing	what	I’m	doing	now	to	how	things	were	in
the	past.

5.	I	tend	to	measure	what’s	happening	now	against	how	I	wish	things	were.
6.	If	I	start	feeling	something	too	intensely,	I	have	ways	of	cutting	off	those
feelings.

If	you	scored	mostly	3’s,	4’s,	and	5’s	on	this	quiz,	you	probably	spend	a	lot	of
time	 pursuing	 the	 “life	 of	 the	 mind.”	 You	 tend	 to	 think	 instead	 of	 feel	—	 to
compare,	judge,	or	theorize	instead	of	simply	experiencing	what	is.	As	you	read
this	 chapter,	 see	 if	 you	 can	 become	 more	 aware	 of	 how	 compulsive	 mental
activity	eclipses	your	ability	 to	 simply	notice	or	 feel.	Remember,	Getting	Real
does	 not	 ask	 that	 you	 stop	 using	 your	 mind	—	 simply	 that	 you	 use	 it	 in	 the
service	of	real	creation	or	real	survival	(as	opposed	to	the	survival	of	your	facade
or	act).



Getting	Real	does	not	ask	that	you	stop	using	your	mind	—
simply	that	you	use	it	in	the	service	of	real	creation	or	real
survival	(as	opposed	to	the	survival	of	your	facade	or	act).

Experiencing	 what	 is	 consists	 of	 two	 important	 components:	 the
“experiencing”	part	and	 the	“what	 is”	part.	Experiencing	what	 is	demands	 that
you	 set	 aside	 your	 beliefs	 about	what	 should	 or	 shouldn’t	 be	 going	 on,	 about
what	you	wish	were	going	on,	what	you	expected,	what	you	were	prepared	for,
what	 you	 interpret,	 and	 what	 you	 judge	 as	 acceptable.	 These	 are	 all	 ways	 of
maintaining	 an	 illusion	 of	 being	 in	 control.	When	 you	 find	 yourself	 unable	 to
stay	 with	 your	 feelings,	 you	 have	 an	 opportunity	 to	 see	 exactly	 what	 you’re
doing	to	avoid	being	present	to	what	is.

Experiencing	what	is	also	helps	you	make	the	distinction
between	what	is,	that	is	what	you	actually	experience	(see,
hear,	sense,b>	feel,	notice,	remember)	and	what	you	imagine
(think,	interpret,	evaluate,	believe).

What	Do	You	“See”?

Experiencing	what	is	also	helps	you	make	the	distinction	between	what	is,	that
is	what	 you	 actually	 experience	 (see,	 hear,	 sense,	 feel,	 notice,	 remember)	 and
what	you	 imagine	 (think,	 interpret,	 evaluate,	 believe).	Here’s	 an	 example.	You
are	driving	down	the	highway,	and	another	car	starts	to	pass	you	on	the	left	but
then	slows	down	and	remains	in	the	lane	right	next	to	you	for	a	while.	The	driver
is	looking	at	you	and	laughing.	What	do	you	see?	Do	you	see	someone	laughing
at	you	or	trying	to	get	your	attention?	If	so,	you’re	making	an	interpretation	or	an
inference.	You	see	him	laughing,	but	you	do	not	see	why	he	is	laughing	—	you
cannot	see	that.	You	can	only	infer,	interpret,	imagine,	guess,	or	assume	why.	He
is	laughing	—	that’s	what	is.	There	is	a	difference	between	what	is	and	the	ideas
you	 have	 about	 it.	 These	 ideas,	 once	 again,	 represent	 an	 attempt	 to	 stay	 in
control,	to	know	something	that	you	cannot	really	know.	The	ability	to	make	this
distinction	between	what	you	actually	see	and	the	meaning	you	attribute	to	what



you	see	is	crucial	to	the	work	of	Getting	Real.

Experiencing	What	Is	in	Your	Relationships

Someone	you	care	about	pushes	you	away	when	you	move	toward	her	for	a
hug.	What	do	you	sense	and	feel?	What	do	you	 imagine?	As	you	answer	both
questions,	make	a	clear	distinction	between	what	happened	(she	pushed	her	hand
against	 your	 chest;	 you	 felt	 anger)	 and	 the	meaning	 you	 give	 to	 this	 behavior
(she’s	 rejecting	 you).	When	 your	 emotions	 are	 involved,	 it’s	 often	 difficult	 to
simply	 notice	what	 is	 without	 jumping	 to	 conclusions	 or	 getting	 your	 buttons
pushed.
Now	imagine	how	you	might	respond	to	this	person	who	has	just	pushed	you

away.	Would	you	say:

1.	Why	don’t	you	like	hugging	me?
2.	Why	are	you	rejecting	me?
3.	I	resent	being	with	someone	who	doesn’t	want	to	be	with	me.
4.	I	resent	you	for	pushing	me	away.
5.	I’m	angry	with	you	for	pushing	me	away.
6.	I	feel	pain	about	your	pushing	me	away.
7.	I’m	upset	by	what	you	did,	and	I	imagine	you’re	losing	interest	in	me.	Are
you?

Statement	 1	 is	 an	 example	 of	 making	 an	 assumption	 or	 jumping	 to	 a
conclusion	—	that	your	friend	doesn’t	 like	hugging	you.	In	reality,	all	you	can
know	is	 that	you	got	pushed	away.	You	cannot	know	why	unless	you	ask.	She
could	be	simply	wanting	to	shield	you	from	her	bad	breath!	Statements	2	and	3
are	 also	 both	 based	 on	 inferences	 about	 your	 friend’s	motives	 (she’s	 rejecting
you	or	doesn’t	want	to	be	with	you).

Most	couples	fight	about	the	meanings	they	attribute	to	the
partner’s	actions.

Statements	4	through	7,	on	the	contrary,	are	all	based	on	what	is.	In	statement
7,	for	example,	by	saying	that	you	imagine	she	is	losing	interest,	you	are	sticking



to	what	is	by	acknowledging	your	imagining	as	just	what	it	is	—	an	imagining.
Many	people	would	say,	“I	think	you	are...”	or	“I	feel	you	are...”	(losing	interest
in	me)	when	they	really	mean	“I	imagine	you	are...”	Saying	“I	feel	you	are...”	is
confusing	because	you	are	camouflaging	an	interpretation	or	imagining	as	your
feeling.	Since	you	can	only	 interpret,	 infer,	or	 imagine	what	 is	going	on	 inside
another	person,	it’s	clearer	to	just	say,	“I	imagine	you	are....”
As	 a	 couples	 counselor,	 I	 have	 found	 that	 most	 couples	 fight	 about	 the

meanings	they	attribute	to	the	partner’s	actions.	They	usually	pay	more	attention
to	these	meanings	than	to	the	event	itself,	and	often	they	completely	forget	what
the	partner	actually	did	in	the	first	place.	They	jump	to	their	own	conclusions	so
fast	that	their	ability	to	experience	what	is	gets	eclipsed.	When	you	learn	instead
to	simply	tell	others	what	you’re	feeling,	without	the	fancy	interpretations,	you
avoid	unnecessary	pain	and	misunderstanding.

You	don’t	experience	an	interpretation.	You	imagine	an
interpretation.	And	your	interpretations	are	often	a	lot	more
painful	than	your	actual	experience.

Experiencing	What	Is	with	a	Mate

For	several	nights	in	a	row	Joan’s	mate	has	said,	“I’m	too	busy	to	spend	time
with	 you	 tonight.”	 Joan	 had	 been	 expecting	 to	 spend	 time	 with	 him,	 and	 she
started	to	imagine	that	the	relationship	is	no	longer	important	to	him.	She	could
launch	 into	 her	 self-protective	 control	 pattern	 (accusing	 him	 instead	 of	 saying
what	she	is	feeling):	“Once	again,	you’re	not	interested	in	being	with	me!”	(said
in	a	self-	righteous	tone	of	voice).	But	jumping	to	conclusions	about	her	mate’s
behavior	 can	 only	 lead	 to	 unnecessary	 pain	 and	 misunderstanding.	 Joan	 feels
hurt	based	on	an	assumption	she	has	made,	that	because	her	mate	is	busy	he	no
longer	cares	about	her.	If	she	were	to	simply	experience	what	is	and	speak	about
what	 she	 feels	 instead	 of	 adding	 her	 own	 interpretation,	 she	 might	 still	 feel
frustration	or	anger	about	not	getting	what	she	wants,	but	those	feelings	are	quite
different	 from	the	hurt	arising	from	her	 interpretation	about	his	statement.	You
don’t	 experience	 an	 interpretation.	 You	 imagine	 an	 interpretation.	 And	 your
interpretations	are	often	a	lot	more	painful	than	your	actual	experience.
If	Joan	were	to	simply	tell	her	mate	that	she	is	angry	and	to	say	specifically



what	 he	 did	 (saying	 he	 was	 too	 busy)	 that	 angered	 her	 without	 making	 an
interpretation,	then	she	would	be	making	real,	experiential	contact	with	him.	Her
words	would	 be	 far	more	 likely	 to	 be	 heard	 and	 felt	 by	 him	 than	 the	 control-
oriented	pronouncement,	“Once	again,	you’re	not	interested...”	Yet	what	is	most
important	in	this	type	of	interaction	is	not	even	whether	her	mate	hears	her,	but
that	she	expresses	what	she	really	feels	—	as	opposed	to	getting	caught	up	in	her
“mind	chatter.”	 It	 is	vital	 that	 she	connect	with	what	she	sensed	and	felt	when
she	 heard	 her	 mate’s	 actual	 words.	 In	 this	 way	 her	 expression	 of	 feeling	 is
connected	 to	 what	 actually	 happened.	 If	 she	 can	 feel	 her	 feelings,	 without
gumming	up	the	works	with	her	interpretations,	she	can	heal	or	forgive.	And	it	is
generally	easier	 for	 the	other	person	 to	hear	us	nondefensively	when	we	speak
about	what	we	heard	them	say	instead	of	why	we	think	they	said	it.

Automatically	responding	to	your	worst	internal	fear	is	a
common	control	pattern.	Your	buttons	are	pushed,	and	you
react.	This	pattern	keeps	you	in	familiar	emotional	territory,
where	you	don’t	have	to	risk	learning	anything	about
yourself.

If	Joan	automatically	modifies	what	her	mate	said	so	 that	 it	conforms	to	her
worst	 fears	 and	 then	 reacts	 to	 that	 interpretation,	 she	will	 suffer	 unnecessarily.
She’ll	 be	 angry	 about	her	 interpretation	—	not	 about	what	 really	happened	—
but	 will	 fail	 to	 notice	 that	 that’s	 what	 angers	 her.	 So	 she	 won’t	 get	 over	 it.
Instead,	 she’ll	 stay	 right	 where	 she	 is	 —	 hanging	 onto	 an	 interpretation	 that
makes	her	feel	wronged	but	righteous.	The	payoff	for	being	right	is	that	she	gets
to	prove	over	and	over	that	whenever	she	loves	a	man	he	winds	up	rejecting	her.
Automatically	 responding	 to	 your	 worst	 internal	 fear	 is	 a	 common	 control
pattern.	 Your	 buttons	 are	 pushed,	 and	 you	 react.	 This	 pattern	 keeps	 you	 in
familiar	 emotional	 territory,	 where	 you	 don’t	 have	 to	 risk	 learning	 anything
about	yourself.	You	don’t	have	to	change.
Authentic	contact	between	self	and	other	 is	 the	aim	of	experiencing	what	 is.

And	 experiencing	what	 is	 requires	 stepping	 into	 the	 unknown	 together	 in	 the
here	and	now,	not	holding	onto	familiar	patterns.	People	are	much	more	likely	to
work	through	a	conflict	or	misunderstanding	if	the	conversation	focuses	on	what
both	 people	 actually	 experienced	—	 and	 not	 on	 what	 they	 imagine	 the	 other
person’s	 actions	 meant.	 Mutual	 understanding	 will	 blossom	 when	 instead	 of



trading	(often	very	familiar)	interpretations	(“You	never	talk	to	me!”	“Well,	you
only	 listen	 for	 what	 you	want	 to	 hear.”),	 partners	 are	 specific	 about	 what	 the
other	really	said	or	did	and	how	they	really	feel	as	a	result	(“You	were	quiet	this
morning,	and	I	felt	lonely.”)

People	are	much	more	likely	to	work	through	a	conflict	or
misunderstanding	if	the	conversation	focuses	on	what	both
people	actually	experienced.

Experiencing	versus	Interpreting	Exercise

We	 all	 know	 how	 easy	 it	 is	 to	 jump	 to	 conclusions	 about	 the	 meaning	 of
someone’s	actions.	We	tend	to	interpret	events	in	terms	of	what	happened	in	the
past	or	what	could	happen	in	the	future,	losing	contact	with	the	present	moment.
When	you	are	able	to	notice	your	anger,	hurt,	resentment,	and	so	on	and	see	what
they’re	 about,	 you’ll	 discover	 that,	more	 often	 than	 not,	 you’re	 responding	 to
your	interpretation	rather	than	to	what	actually	happened.
Try	this	exercise:	Think	of	something	that	someone	did	or	said	that	displeased

you.	Be	specific	about	what	was	done	or	said.	Now	reflect	back	on	the	meaning
or	 interpretation	 you	 attributed	 to	 that	 behavior.	 I	 recall	 a	 recent	 interchange
between	two	friends	of	mine,	Murray	and	Marilyn.	Marilyn	asked	Murray	to	go
to	a	social	gathering	with	her.	When	he	said	he	didn’t	want	to	go,	she	asked	him
about	going	 to	 a	different	 event	 in	hopes	 that	 this	 second	one	might	 appeal	 to
him	more.	What	 she	 actually	 said	was,	 “Do	 you	want	 to	 go	 to	 the	 Page’s	 for
dinner	tonight?”	and	then,	after	he	refused,	“Well,	how	about	the	apple	pressing
party	at	Charlie’s?”	What	he	heard	was,	“You’re	not	a	good	partner.	You	don’t
like	to	go	places	with	me.”	And	so	they	got	into	a	fight	about	whether	she	was
judging	him	as	 being	 a	 lousy	partner.	Obviously,	 one	of	Murray’s	 buttons	had
gotten	pushed.	This	sort	of	thing	happens	often	when	two	people	care	about	each
other	and	really	hate	displeasing	each	other.	Buttons	make	us	especially	sensitive
to	interpretations	that	confirm	our	worst	fears.	As	you	do	this	exercise	yourself,
you’ll	learn	the	most	if	you	choose	an	incident	that	pushed	your	button.

When	you	are	able	to	notice	your	anger,	hurt,	resentment,	and



so	on	and	see	what	they’re	about,	you’ll	discover	that,	more
often	than	not,	you’re	responding	to	your	interpretation
rather	than	to	what	actually	happened.

Now	focus	on	something	someone	did	that	pleased	you.	How	did	you	interpret
their	action?	Someone	once	gave	me	a	gift	 that	perfectly	 suited	my	 tastes.	My
interpretation	was,	 “She	 really	 knows	me.	She	 really	 cares.	 She’s	 been	paying
attention	 to	what	 I	 like.”	That	 interpretation	 gave	me	 a	 lot	 of	 pleasure.	 I	 later
learned	 that	 she	 had	 bought	 this	 same	 gift	 for	 all	 the	 other	 women	 in	 our
women’s	group.	So	positive	experiences	can	be	subject	to	misinterpretation	just
like	negative	ones	can.	As	I	reflect	on	this	misinterpretation	of	mine,	I	can	see
how	it	is	related	to	one	of	my	buttons.	I’m	very	sensitive	about	people	giving	me
gifts	 I	 don’t	 like,	 since	 this	 happened	 to	 me	 a	 lot	 at	 Christmas	 while	 I	 was
growing	up.	Our	buttons	can	really	mess	with	our	ability	to	perceive	the	truth	of
a	 situation.	 Doing	 this	 exercise	 will	 help	 you	 to	 experience	 rather	 than	 to
interpret.

Noticing	versus	Imagining	Exercise

Here	is	another	exercise	to	help	you	learn	to	distinguish	what	you	actually	see,
hear,	or	experience	from	what	you	imagine,	think,	or	judge.	In	the	Getting	Real
workshops,	 I	 ask	 people	 to	 pair	 up	 and	 tell	 each	 other	 something	 they	 notice
about	 each	 other,	 and	 then	 I	 ask	 them	 to	 allow	 a	 fantasy	 (an	 imagining	 or
interpretation)	about	what	they	see	to	emerge.	It	doesn’t	matter	if	the	imaginings
are	correct.	That’s	not	 the	point.	For	example,	one	person	might	 say,	 “I	notice
you	are	wearing	pearls	.	.	.	and	I	imagine	you’re	from	Westchester	County.”	Or
“I	notice	you’re	tapping	your	finger...	and	I	imagine	you’re	nervous	about	what
I’m	going	to	say	about	you.”	Do	you	get	the	idea?	Your	noticing	is	usually	pretty
simple	 and	undramatic.	Your	 imagining	 can	 get	 fanciful,	 convoluted,	 and	 “out
there.”	If	you	pay	attention	to	your	imaginings	over	a	period	of	 time,	you	may
discover	 the	 same	 theme	 running	 through	 most	 of	 them.	 For	 example,	 some
people	see	impatience	in	the	other	person’s	expression	whether	or	not	the	other
felt	 impatient.	 Others	 tend	 to	 hear	 criticism	 in	 other	 people’s	 remarks,
independent	of	the	actual	circumstances.



If	you	pay	attention	to	your	imaginings	over	a	period	of	time,
you	may	discover	the	same	theme	running	through	most	of
them.

To	 do	 this	 exercise,	 you’ll	 need	 a	 partner.	 Sit	 face-to-face	 and	 take	 turns
stating	what	you	see	or	notice	followed	by	what	you	imagine.	When	your	partner
projects	an	imagining	onto	you,	don’t	focus	on	whether	it’s	correct	or	not.	The
aim	of	the	exercise	is	to	consciously	play	with	the	interpretations	or	assessments
and	 to	 consciously	 recognize	 the	distinction	between	what	your	 senses	 receive
and	what	your	mind	does	with	this	information.
A	secondary	aim	of	 this	exercise	 is	 to	give	you	practice	 letting	other	people

have	 their	 interpretations	about	you	—	and	noticing	how	you	 feel	 about	 them.
This	practice	helps	to	strengthen	your	inner	sense	of	yourself	—	providing	that
you	can	actually	allow	yourself	to	experience	what	comes	up	in	your	awareness.
Any	 time	you	express	yourself	openly,	you	are	 risking	being	misunderstood.	 It
happens.	This	exercise	helps	you	practice	letting	others	think	what	they	think.	In
time,	you	will	find	that	even	when	people	do	misunderstand	you,	your	sense	of
self	is	not	diminished.
You	 can	 do	 the	 I	 notice...	 I	 imagine	 exercise	 as	 part	 of	 your	 everyday

conversations	with	people.	It’s	fun	to	practice	distinguishing	between	what	you
notice	 and	 what	 you	 infer,	 and	 it	 shows	 the	 other	 person	 that	 you	 are	 not
identified	with	your	interpretation.	If	you	say,	for	example,	“I	notice	that	you	are
looking	at	the	floor	as	you	talk,	and	I	imagine	you	are	afraid	of	looking	me	in	the
eye,”	 you	 are	 owning	 your	 imagining	 as	 just	 that	 —	 an	 imagining.	 You	 are
making	 an	 interpretation,	 but	 you	 are	 not	 saying	 your	 interpretation	 is	 right.
When	 you	 take	 responsibility	 for	 your	 mind’s	 machinations	 by	 making	 the
distinction	 between	 what	 you	 notice	 and	 what	 you	 imagine,	 you	 help	 both
yourself	and	the	other	person	to	take	your	interpretations	more	lightly.

When	you	take	responsibility	for	your	mind’s	machinations
by	making	the	distinction	between	what	you	notice	and	what
you	imagine,	you	help	both	yourself	and	the	other	person	to
take	your	interpretations	more	lightly.



Playing	 with	 expressing	 your	 imaginings	 in	 this	 way	 also	 helps	 you	 stop
projecting	 them	onto	others	 and	gives	you	a	 feeling	of	being	“in	 control”	 in	 a
whole	 new	way.	As	 you	 come	 to	 identify	 yourself	 as	 a	 “noticer”	 instead	 of	 a
“reactor,”	things	won’t	push	your	buttons	like	they	did	before.
Other	examples	of	mind	chatter	that	you	can	learn	to	take	more	lightly	are	the

comparisons	 and	 evaluations	 that	 often	 fill	 your	 inner	 airwaves	 as	 you	 move
through	your	daily	activities:	“I	like	this,	I	don’t	like	that...	She’s	prettier,	but	I
have	 a	 nicer	 figure....	 If	 I	 say	 that,	 he’ll	 probably	 get	 mad.”	 The	 point	 of
experiencing	what	is	is	to	notice	this	behavior,	not	to	get	rid	of	it.	Essentially,	the
ten	 truth	 skills	 will	 help	 you	 achieve	 a	 more	 spacious	 relationship	 to	 your
internal	dialogue.

As	you	come	to	identify	yourself	as	a	“noticer”	instead	of	a
“reactor,”	things	won’t	push	your	buttons	like	they	did
before.

A	Pain	in	the	Ego

At	 first,	 just	 noticing	 and	 experiencing	 what	 is,	 without	 embellishment,	 is
often	difficult	because	it’s	more	comfortable	to	focus	on	what	you	think	should
be	 happening	 than	 on	what	 really	 is	 happening.	 If	 Sara’s	mate	 leaves	 her	 for
another	woman,	for	example,	she’ll	find	it	easier	to	focus	on	what	he	should	or
shouldn’t	have	done	than	on	her	present	pain.	To	get	to	the	point	where	she	can
allow	herself	to	fully	experience	a	“pain	in	the	ego,”	she’ll	need	to	learn	that	her
ego	 (her	mind’s	 idea	 of	who	 she	 is)	 does	 not	 solely	 define	 her.	 She’ll	 need	 to
become	aware	that	she	is	also	a	deep	and	abiding	presence,	like	the	breath,	that
no	one	can	damage	or	diminish	no	matter	what	they	say	or	do	to	her.
Experiencing	what	is	helps	you	hold	your	ego	identity	more	lightly	—	so	that

you	will	not	need	to	focus	so	much	on	protecting	it	from	hurt,	embarrassment,	or
discomfort.	 This	 truth	 skill	 brings	 you	 to	 an	 awareness	 of	 something	 in	 you,
some	 energetic	 presence,	 that	 connects	 you	 to	 a	 larger	 reality	 (also	 called	 the
Tao,	 God,	 Being,	 Life,	 the	 Force).	 Experiencing	 what	 is	 and	 expressing	 the
feelings	 that	 arise	 help	 you	 stay	 connected	 to	 yourself,	 to	 the	 other	 person,	 to
reality,	 and	 therefore	 to	 this	 larger	 energetic	 presence.	 For	 most	 people,
disidentifying	 from	 the	ego	constitutes	 a	huge	 shift,	 because	we	 think	 that	our



ego	 identity	 is	 who	 we	 are.	 When	 painful	 memories	 are	 triggered,	 it	 can	 be
especially	 difficult.	Although	 this	 process	 can	 be	 hard	work,	 it	 is	 the	work	 of
becoming	a	fully	functioning	human	being.

That’s	just	another	prejudice	of	the	mind	—	that	pain	is	to	be
avoided	at	all	costs.

When	 you	 identify	 yourself	 primarily	 as	 your	 ego	 identity	 and	 remain
unaware	of	your	own	very	powerful	energetic	presence,	you	tend	to	believe	that
pain	 is	 bad.	 That’s	 just	 another	 prejudice	 of	 the	 mind	 —	 that	 pain	 is	 to	 be
avoided	at	all	costs.	To	evolve	 into	your	capacity	 to	experience	what	 is,	you’ll
need	 to	be	prepared	 to	accept	 and	welcome	what’s	 real	—	even	 if	 it’s	painful.
Resisting	the	experience	of	pain	can	make	it	hurt	worse.	Entering	it	fully,	as	we
saw	from	Mona’s	story	above,	can	lead	you	through	it	to	the	other	side.

Imaginary	Danger

One	 of	my	 teachers,	 Fritz	 Perls,	 used	 to	 say,	 “What	 is,	 is.”	 Sounds	 simple,
huh?	But	 this	 concept	 is	 actually	 pretty	 difficult	 for	most	 people	 to	 grasp.	We
still	 have	 to	 contend	 with	 our	 ego-minds,	 which	 have	 been	 conditioned	 from
birth	to	watch	out	for	danger.	Sometimes	watching	for	danger	is	appropriate,	as
when	we	look	both	ways	before	crossing	a	street.	Too	often,	however,	the	mind
imagines	 danger	 where	 none	 exists.	 I’ll	 give	 you	 an	 example.	 Fern	 and	 her
partner,	Lance,	are	at	a	party,	when	Lance	suddenly	walks	away	from	her.	When
Fern	sees	 him	walk	away	 she	might	 imagine	 he	 disapproves	 of	 something	 she
did.	 His	 walking	 away	 may	 have	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 what	 she	 imagines	 it’s
about,	but	her	imaginings	help	Fern	feel	in	control.	They	support	the	illusion	that
she	 knows	 what’s	 going	 on.	 They	 help	 her	 anticipate	 what	 she	 should	 do	 to
prevent	further	damage	 to	her	ego.	 In	 this	case,	 for	example,	she	can	now	arm
herself	in	advance	with	excuses	and	accusations	so	that	when	she	and	Lance	get
home,	 she’ll	 be	 prepared	 to	 defend	 against	 whatever	 (she	 imagines)	 he
disapproved	 of.	 Such	 mental	 strategizing	 effectively	 distracts	 her	 from
experiencing	what	is.
Our	ego-minds	are	repositories	for	all	sorts	of	ideas	about	how	people	are	and

how	they	should	be,	how	things	work	and	how	they	should	work.	Our	minds	do



have	 the	 legitimate	 function	of	protecting	us	 from	real	danger.	 In	a	potentially
dangerous	 situation,	 it	 may	 serve	 us	 to	 have	 a	 mental	 model	 of	 how	 things
worked	in	the	past,	as	in:	“I	touched	the	stove	burner	not	realizing	it	was	still	on,
and	I	got	burned.	Next	time	I’ll	notice	if	the	burner	is	on.”	But	somewhere	along
the	 line	 in	 our	 evolution,	 the	 duties	 and	 responsibilities	 in	 the	 mind’s	 job
description	grew	beyond	the	mind’s	capabilities.	So	now	many	of	us	have	a	mind
that	just	won’t	stop	telling	us	what	to	watch	out	for,	what	we	should	or	shouldn’t
have	done,	what	to	expect,	what	people	are	really	thinking	—	and	so	much	more.
With	 all	 this	mental	 noise	 in	 our	 perceptual	 field,	 there’s	 very	 little	 space	 left
over	for	noticing	what	is	(including	something	that	really	could	be	dangerous!).

Sometimes	watching	for	danger	is	appropriate,	as	when	we
look	both	ways	before	crossing	a	street.	Too	often,	however,
the	mind	imagines	danger	where	none	exists.

Your	Hero’s	Journey

Getting	 Real	 is	 a	 journey	 back	 to	 rediscovering	 the	 freshness,	 joy,	 and
practicality	of	 the	simple,	direct	experience	of	each	moment.	 It	 is	a	 true	hero’s
journey.	Like	the	characters	in	ancient	myths	and	stories,	you	set	out	on	a	quest
(to	 become	 your	 real	 self).	 You	 meet	 obstacles	 along	 the	 way	 (your	 beliefs,
judgments,	 shoulds,	 addictions,	 and	 control	 patterns).	You	get	 help	 from	other
people	(people	you	share	this	book	with,	for	example).	You	get	to	the	top	of	the
proverbial	mountain	(mastering	the	ten	truth	skills).	Then,	as	T.	S.	Eliot’s	famous
poem	“Little	Gidding”	describes,	you	arrive	back	where	you	started	and	“know
the	place	for	the	first	time.”
One	of	the	activities	I	ask	my	workshop	participants	to	take	part	in	is	to	tell	a

shortened	version	of	their	life	story.	I	ask	them	to	focus	especially	on	incidents	in
which	they	learned	how	safe	or	unsafe	it	is	to	be	truthful.	Then,	as	we	listen	to
each	story,	the	audience	takes	note	of	all	the	beliefs,	prejudices,	and	conclusions
the	 speaker	 seems	 to	have	 taken	on	over	 the	course	of	a	 lifetime	 that	 interfere
with	simply	experiencing	what	is.	We	infer	these	things	both	from	the	story	itself
and	from	the	way	the	story	is	told.	At	the	end	of	the	exercise,	after	everyone	has
told	their	story,	we	pair	up	and	give	one	another	feedback	about	the	beliefs	we
have	identified	for	each	person.



Our	minds	do	have	the	legitimate	function	of	protecting	us
from	real	danger.	In	a	potentially	dangerous	situation,	it	may
serve	us	to	have	a	mental	model	of	how	things	worked	in	the
past.

How	Beliefs	Happen

Not	long	ago,	I	was	doing	some	management	coaching	with	Sheldon,	a	thirty-
five-year-old	 sales	 manager	 employed	 by	 a	 major	 clothing	 manufacturer.	 His
story	 illustrates	how	unresolved	emotional	 trauma	can	distort	a	person’s	ability
to	truly	experience	reality.	Sheldon’s	boss,	the	district	sales	manager,	had	set	up
a	 series	 of	 performance	 coaching	 sessions	 for	Sheldon	because	his	 convoluted
communication	style	was	impeding	his	performance.	Sheldon	became	defensive
whenever	anyone	asked	him	a	direct	question	and	therefore	was	not	able	to	give
clear,	direct	answers	to	questions	from	customers	and	coworkers.
One	day,	his	manager	called	him	in	for	a	conference:	“Hey	Sheldon,	I	notice

you	haven’t	been	calling	on	 the	O’Toole	 account	 lately.	How	come?”	Sheldon
flushed	and	stammered	his	reply:	“Oh,	 that	Richard	O’Toole	really	 lacks	class.
You	should	see	the	office	furniture	he	just	bought	—	really	gaudy	and	tasteless.
And	he	spends	more	time	at	the	gym	than	at	the	office.	I	don’t	know	about	that
guy.”	Sheldon	was	unaware	of	his	manager’s	quizzical	expression.	And	he	had
no	 idea	 how	 much	 his	 defensiveness	 was	 costing	 him	 until	 his	 manager
recommended	the	coaching	sessions.
Sheldon	 confessed	 to	me	 that	 he	 had	 the	 same	 problem	 at	 home.	 His	 wife

complained	 that	 if	 she’d	 ask	 him	 a	 simple	 question	 like,	 “Did	 you	 water	 the
plants	 today?”	 Sheldon	 would	 get	 tense	 and	 tongue-tied	 and	 start	 making
excuses:	“I	had	to	get	 the	oil	changed	in	my	car,	and	I	had	to	pick	up	laundry,
and	my	boss	needed	me	to	work	late.”
Here	 is	 how	 Sheldon	 became	 aware	 of	 the	 roots	 of	 his	 defensive

communication	 pattern.	 First	 he	 readily	 admitted	 that	 he	 had	 always	 been
uncomfortable	with	any	direct	questioning,	but	he	had	no	idea	where	the	pattern
might	have	originated.	After	he	got	comfortable	talking	about	himself	with	me,
more	 and	 more	 memories	 from	 his	 childhood	 began	 to	 surface.	 He	 recalled
numerous	 instances	 when	 he	 was	 encouraged	 to	 tell	 the	 truth	 in	 response	 to
direct	 questioning	 from	 his	 mother.	 When	 he	 did	 so,	 he	 was	 immediately



punished.	 So	 he	 developed	 the	 false	 belief	 that	 it	 isn’t	 safe	 to	 be	 honest,
especially	in	response	to	a	direct	question.	It	soon	became	clear	that	this	belief
was	at	the	root	of	his	present	defensiveness.
Sheldon	told	me	that	now,	when	anyone	asks	him	a	question,	“It’s	as	if	there’s

a	small,	scared	voice	inside	me,	like	the	voice	of	a	child,	saying,	‘Don’t	answer
that.	 It’s	 not	 safe.	 Watch	 out.’”	 After	 uncovering	 his	 outdated	 belief	 that	 he
would	 get	 punished	 if	 he	 answered	 directly	 and	 truthfully,	 Sheldon	 decided	 to
take	some	 risks	and	 test	out	 this	belief.	He	began,	 first	with	his	wife	and	 later
with	his	colleagues,	to	stop	and	pay	attention	to	his	body	any	time	he	heard	that
little-boy	 voice	 telling	 him	 he	wasn’t	 safe.	 Instead	 of	 acting	 out	 his	 defensive
pattern,	 he	 tried	 simply	 to	 experience	 all	 his	 feelings	 and	 to	 notice	 what	 was
actually	going	on:	his	mother	was	nowhere	in	sight,	and	the	question	being	asked
was	one	he	actually	had	an	answer	to.	Sheldon	took	a	few	calculated	risks	and
dared	 to	be	 truthful	and	direct.	He	noticed	 that	nothing	bad	happened	and	 that
things	 actually	went	 pretty	well.	 So	 he	 tried	 speaking	 honestly	 and	 directly	 in
other	situations.	Soon,	his	defensive	pattern	was	no	longer	running	him.	He	still
noticed	the	little	voice	at	times,	but	he	recognized	it	as	a	voice	from	the	distant
past.

Seeing	Is	Not	Believing

Here’s	another	example	to	further	illustrate	how	your	beliefs	can	impair	your
ability	 to	 see	what	 is.	 Helen	 has	 a	 belief	 about	 how	men	 are,	which	makes	 it
difficult	 for	 her	 to	 notice	 exceptions	 to	 the	 rule.	 She	 has	 a	 preconception	 that
men	need	to	fix	women’s	problems,	with	the	result	that	they	can’t	simply	listen
to	what	the	women	are	saying.	The	other	day	when	my	partner	asked	her	about
her	 recent	 breakup	 and	 then	 asked	 her	 another	 question	 after	 she	 had	 finished
telling	 him,	 she	 reacted,	 “There	 you	 go	 jumping	 in	 to	 fix	 things	 that	 can’t	 be
fixed!”	He	was	asking	her	to	elaborate	on	something	that	had	piqued	his	sincere
interest,	 but	 as	 soon	 as	 he	 opened	 his	mouth,	 she	 immediately	 jumped	 to	 the
conclusion	that	he	was	trying	to	fix	her.	Helen’s	belief	that	men	only	want	to	fix
her	feelings	was	a	powerful	button	for	her,	so	when	it	gets	pushed,	she	becomes
automatically	defensive	or	aggressive.

A	button	is	a	“belief	gone	mad.”



I	introduced	the	notion	of	buttons	earlier.	A	button	is	a	“belief	gone	mad.”	It	is
a	predisposition	 to	 feel	 hurt,	 slighted,	 or	 attacked	when	you	 imagine	 that	 your
negative	expectations	have	been	fulfilled.	If	you	believe	that	people	see	you	as
unable	to	take	care	of	yourself,	your	button	will	get	pushed	and	you’ll	overreact
when	someone	tries	to	open	the	car	door	for	you.	Or	if	you	fear	that	whenever
you	get	close	to	people,	they	leave	you,	then	you’ll	overreact	when	your	partner
wants	some	time	alone.
You	can	learn	to	slow	down	your	reaction	time	once	you	have	identified	your

buttons	and	beliefs.	Just	becoming	aware	of	how	your	beliefs	cloud	your	vision
can	go	a	 long	way	 toward	helping	you	 take	 the	 time	 to	 find	out	what	 is	 really
going	on,	as	 in:	“I	feel	myself	contracting	and	starting	to	get	defensive.	I	want
you	to	tell	me	what	you	meant	when	you	said	that.”	Once	you	have	tried	testing
reality	a	few	times	and	found	out	something	that	you	didn’t	know	(relating),	you
will	 learn	 that	 it	 actually	 feels	 better	 than	 pretending	 or	 assuming	 that	 you
already	know	(controlling).

Noticing	What’s	Happening	Exercise

Once	you	have	begun	to	detach	from	your	identification	with	your	beliefs	and
judgments,	 you	 will	 be	 in	 better	 shape	 to	 notice	 what	 you	 are	 actually
experiencing	in	the	present	moment.
Find	a	friend	who	will	be	willing	to	do	this	exercise	with	you:	Sit	facing	each

other.	 Take	 turns	 saying	 out	 loud	 what	 you	 sense	 or	 notice	 in	 your	 body:	 “I
notice	(or	I	am	aware	of)	my	breath	going	in	and	out	of	my	nostrils.”	“I	notice	a
tingling	sensation	in	my	genitals.”	“I	notice	tension	in	my	jaw.”	Then	do	a	round
of	sharing	what	you	notice	in	the	room:	“I	notice	the	sunlight	coming	in	through
the	window.”	 “I	 notice	 the	movement	 of	 the	 clouds	 outside.”	 “I	 notice	 a	 dark
stain	on	the	rug.”	If	you	wish,	you	can	stop	reading	and	do	this	by	yourself	right
now.	Relax	and	pay	attention	 to	what	you	notice	 in	your	body.	See	 if	you	can
simply	notice	first	the	sensations	in	your	body	and	then	the	things	you	observe	in
your	 surroundings,	 without	 judging	 them	 as	 good	 or	 bad,	 significant	 or
insignificant.

Once	you	have	begun	to	detach	from	your	identification	with
your	beliefs	and	judgments,	you	will	be	in	better	shape	to
notice	what	you	are	actually	experiencing	in	the	present



moment.

In	 my	 workshops,	 we	 then	 go	 around	 the	 circle	 and	 share	 what	 we	 notice
happening	 in	 our	 minds.	 Usually	 we	 share	 what	 we	 notice	 ourselves	 saying
inwardly	in	the	moment,	what	I	call	“self-talk”:	“I’m	saying	to	myself	I	hope	the
group	is	impressed	by	what	I	just	shared";	“I	notice	I’m	judging	Tony,	thinking
he	should	be	paying	attention”;	“I’m	thinking	that	I	should	have	something	more
significant	to	say.”
Again,	stop	reading	for	a	minute,	and	pay	attention	to	what	you	are	saying	to

yourself	in	this	moment.	There	is	no	correct	thing	that	you	should	or	shouldn’t
be	 saying.	Most	people	have	an	 internal	 commentary	going	on	all	 the	 time.	 “I
shouldn’t	 be	 taking	 so	 much	 time	 with	 this.”	 “After	 this,	 I’m	 going	 to	 get
something	to	eat.”	“This	is	a	waste	of	time.”
These	awareness	exercises	are	simple	but	not	easy	for	many	of	us.	Our	active

minds	have	trouble	being	satisfied	with	just	the	facts.	The	mind	likes	to	compare
our	present	 state	with	 some	wished-for	 and	often	unattainable	 state.	 It	 likes	 to
aspire	 to	being	“better”	 (which	 is	often	a	control	pattern	 to	avoid	experiencing
how	you	really	are).	And	it	likes	to	attach	significance	to	what	we	perceive.

The	mind	likes	to	compare	our	present	state	with	some
wished-for	and	often	unattainable	state.	It	likes	to	aspire	to
being	“better”	(which	is	often	a	control	pattern	to	avoid
experiencing	how	you	really	are).

Your	Real	Self	Doesn’t	Need	Protecting

As	I	have	noted,	your	mental	chatter	 is	simply	 the	mind’s	attempt	 to	protect
itself	—	 to	 avoid	 the	 anxiety	 or	 helplessness	 of	 not	 knowing	 or	 not	 being	 in
control.	 Yet	 your	 real	 self,	 your	 presence,	 you	 as	 the	 noticer,	 doesn’t	 need
protecting	 or	 defending.	 It	 simply	 needs	 to	 be	 experienced.	 The	 more	 you
experience	yourself	as	“the	one	who	notices,”	the	safer	you	will	feel.	My	mother
often	used	to	remind	me,	“No	one	can	take	anything	away	from	you	if	it	really
belongs	 to	 you.”	 As	 you	 proceed	 on	 your	 hero’s	 journey,	 you	 will	 learn	 to
distinguish	between	what	really	belongs	to	you	(your	presence	or	beingness)	and



what	is	nonessential	or	transitory	(your	ideas	about	yourself).
In	the	following	chapters,	you	will	learn	how	the	nine	other	truth	skills	relate

to	this	first	one.	Experiencing	what	is	is	the	foundation	on	which	the	other	truth
skills	rest.	You	won’t	be	able	to	pick	up	these	other	skills	until	you	have	some
ability	 to	distinguish	what	 is	 from	your	 judgments	 and	 assessments.	Likewise,
the	more	you	practice	the	other	truth	skills,	the	greater	will	be	your	capacity	to
experience	what	is.

Experiencing	What	Is	in	a	Nutshell

•	Experiencing	what	is	means	allowing	yourself	to	feel	what	you	feel	without
inhibiting	yourself	shutting	down.

•	If	you	discover	that	you	are	inhibiting	yourself,	notice	this.	And	if	you	feel
pain	about	it,	feel	the	pain.	Allow	the	noticing	of	the	pain	to	guide	you	to
whatever	shows	up	next	in	your	awareness,	and	experience	that.

•	Eventually,	by	experiencing	whatever	comes	up	in	your	awareness,	you	will
be	able	to	confront	your	energy	blocks,	your	control	patterns,	and	your	false
beliefs	and	to	move	through	them	to	a	place	of	healing.	If	you	cannot
experience	what	is,	it	will	be	impossible	to	heal.

•	Learn	to	make	the	crucial	distinction	between	what	you	notice	or	experience
and	what	you	judge,	assess,	interpret,	or	believe.	Don’t	let	your	ego-mind
take	you	on	its	trip!

•	Experiencing	what	is	requires	that	you	be	willing	to	step	into	the	unknown.
You	cannot	control	where	your	experiencing	will	take	you.

•	Notice	and	report	your	sensations,	your	feelings,	your	thoughts,	your
judgments,	and	your	self-talk.	Share	these	honestly	as	a	way	to	move	past
them	to	whatever	calls	your	attention	next.

•	The	object	of	experiencing	and	expressing	is	to	keep	yourself	engaged	in	the
flow	of	life,	to	experience	yourself	as	a	cocreative	participant	in	this	big
evolutionary	dance	we	call	life.	Doing	so	will	help	you	to	avoid	taking	any
one	interaction	too	seriously.



CHAPTER	3
BEING	TRANSPARENT

FREEDOM’S	JUST	ANOTHER
WORD	FOR	NOTHING	LEFT

TO	HIDE

Jenny	and	Fred	were	having	a	dinner	party	for	a	few	other	couples	to	celebrate
their	 thirtieth	 wedding	 anniversary.	 A	 lovely	 bottle	 of	 champagne	 was	 being
poured,	 and	 it	was	 time	 for	 toasts.	Fred	 lifted	his	glass,	 first	 to	 the	guests	 and
then	 to	 his	 smiling	 wife:“I	 tried	 to	 do	 research	 on	 the	 Internet	 for	 something
inspiring	having	 to	do	with	 thirty	years,	but	all	 I	could	find	was	a	reference	 to
the	Thirty	Years	War....”At	 that	 point	 one	 of	 the	 other	 guests,	 trying	 to	 rescue
Fred,	 interrupted	 the	 toast	with	another	attempt	at	humor,	 so	Fred	never	got	 to
complete	his	thought.	He	was	planning	to	talk	about	how	rewarding	his	life	with
Jenny	had	been	in	spite	of	a	few	skirmishes	here	and	there,	but	he	never	got	a
chance	to	say	what	he’d	planned.	All	Jenny	could	think	was,“He	compares	our
marriage	to	the	Thirty	Years	War!”She	felt	hurt	and	had	a	hard	time	making	eye
contact	with	Fred.	As	she	sat	there	stunned,	trying	to	be	a	good	sport	and	enjoy
her	 dinner,	 she	 realized	 she	 had	 a	 couple	 of	 options:	 she	 could	 ignore	 her
feelings	and	fake	it	for	the	rest	of	the	party	or	she	could	speak	about	her	feelings.
She	decided	 to	 speak	up:“Fred,	 I’m	 sitting	here	 trying	 to	 tell	myself	 that	 your
comment	 comparing	 our	marriage	 to	 the	 Thirty	 Years	War	was	 nothing	 to	 be
upset	by,	but	I’m	noticing	my	heart	is	pounding,	and	I’m	having	trouble	making
eye	contact	with	you.	I	don’t	want	to	carry	this	feeling	for	the	entire	evening.	So,
in	spite	of	the	fact	that	this	is	a	formal	dinner	party,	I	want	to	say	I	do	feel	very
upset	and	angry,	and	I	hope	you	can	understand	why.”
A	hush	went	over	 the	couple’s	elegant	dining	room,	as	 the	guests	waited	for

Fred’s	 response.	After	 a	 brief	 pause,	 Fred,	 looking	 flustered	 and	 embarrassed,
did	reply:“Hey,	I’m	feeling	really	awful	too!	I	feel	how	that	must’ve	come	across



to	you,	Jenny,	but	I	didn’t	get	to	finish	my	toast.	I	was	going	to	say	that	in	spite
of	our	occasional	skirmishes,	we’ve	had	a	pretty	wonderful	 life	all	 these	 thirty
years.	I’m	so	sorry	that	hurt	you.”The	guests	heaved	a	collective	sigh	of	relief	as
Jenny	gave	Fred	a	warm	smile	and	said,“Wow,	I	feel	better	now.	Thanks,	Fred.
Thanks,	everyone.”

When	you’re	letting	someone	know	how	his	words	affected
you,it’s	important	to	be	specific	about	what	you	heard.

If	 you	 had	 been	 in	 Jenny’s	 situation,	what	would	 you	 have	 done?	Can	 you
picture	yourself	taking	the	risk	of	making	your	guests	uncomfortable	to	express
yourself	 and	 clear	 the	 air?	 Or	 would	 you	 have	 sat	 on	 your	 feelings,	 hoping
they’d	go	away,	and	maybe	tell	Fred	later?	Or	would	you	have	chastised	yourself
for	being	too	sensitive	and	try	to	get	over	it?	Or	perhaps	you’d	have	simply	told
yourself	that	it	was	no	big	deal.
The	choice	you	make	reflects	your	beliefs	about	how	safe	it	is	to	be	honest,	to

let	 yourself	 be	 seen	 by	 others.	 Noticing	 your	 choices	 in	 such	 situations	 and
experiencing	your	feelings	as	you	take	action	is	what	Getting	Real	is	about.	Then
you	make	the	choice	either	to	let	yourself	be	seen	or	to	hide,	pretend,	withhold,
or	 talk	 yourself	 out	 of	 your	 feelings	 (as	 in,“it’s	 no	 big	 deal”).	 Noticing	 and
becoming	aware	are	the	work	of	truth	skill	#1,	experiencing	what	is.	Expressing
what	you	feel	or	notice	is	the	domain	of	truth	skill	#2,	the	subject	of	this	chapter.
Jenny’s	statement	to	Fred	was	motivated	by	an	attempt	to	clear	the	air	so	she

could	get	over	her	hurt	and	anger	and	enjoy	the	rest	of	the	party.	It	came	from
her	intent	to	know	and	be	known	(to	relate),	not	to	make	Fred	feel	bad	or	look
bad	in	front	of	their	guests	(to	control).	When	you	communicate	with	the	intent
to	 relate,	 you	will	 naturally	 become	more	 transparent,	 that	 is,	 easier	 to	 know.
You	 aren’t	 being	 strategic	 or	 trying	 to	 manipulate	 the	 outcome.	 You’re	 being
open	and	sincere,	with	no	hidden	agenda.	You’ll	 learn	more	about	relating	and
controlling	in	chapter	4,“Noticing	Your	Intent.”
Note	 that	Jenny	also	spoke	about	what	she	observed	in	her	body	—	that	her

heart	was	pounding	and	that	she	was	having	trouble	making	eye	contact	with	her
husband.	Here	she	was	using	truth	skill	#1,	experiencing	what	is.	And	she	was
specific	 about	 what	 Fred	 did	 that	 angered	 her.	 When	 you’re	 letting	 someone
know	how	his	words	affected	you,	it’s	important	to	be	specific	about	what	you
heard.	 Jenny	 did	 include	 one	 gross	 inaccuracy	 however,	 which	 made	 her



statement	 less	 effective	 than	 it	 might	 have	 been:	 she	 assumed	 that	 Fred	 was
comparing	 their	marriage	 to	 the	Thirty	Years	War,	when	actually,	 according	 to
Fred,	 that	was	not	what	he	was	doing	at	all.	So	 if	Jenny	had	said,“I	heard	you
say’	 Thirty	 Years	 War,’	 and	 I	 assumed	 you	 were	 comparing	 our	 marriage	 to
that,”that	would	have	been	more	effective.

Being	specific	helps	you	connect	to	your	felt	experience
instead	of	to	your	interpretation.

Some	people	in	Fred’s	place	would	have	immediately	gotten	defensive	if	they
heard	 their	wife	misinterpret	 their	behavior	as	Jenny	did.	So	 if	you	can,	 repeat
back	 exactly	 what	 the	 other	 said	 that	 offended	 you.	 That	 way	 you’re	 both
working	off	the	same	reality	blueprint.	Also,	being	specific	helps	you	connect	to
your	 felt	 experience	 instead	 of	 to	 your	 interpretation.	 When	 you	 replay	 the
words,	you	can	more	readily	return	to	exactly	what	you	were	experiencing	when
you	heard	them.	But	whatever	words	you	use,	the	point	is	to	notice	what	you	are
doing.	 The	 ten	 truth	 skills	 that	 you	 are	 learning	 constitute	 a	 way	 of	 using
language	that	fosters	clearer	noticing,	deepening	self-awareness,	and	more	open
contact	between	people.

Self-Assessment	Quiz

Here’s	another	quiz.	Give	yourself	a	1	to	5	rating	for	each	item	(with	1	being
usually	not	true	of	you	and	5	being	mostly	true).

1.	I	have	trouble	openly	expressing	my	emotions.
2.	I	have	trouble	telling	my	sexual	partner	what	I	like	and	desire	most.
3.	I	have	trouble	saying	things	that	I	think	will	hurt	someone’s	feelings	or
upset	them.

4.	I	have	trouble	showing	weakness,	vulnerability,	or	uncertainty.
5.	I	have	trouble	revealing	things	I’ve	done	that	I’m	ashamed	of.
6.	I	have	difficulty	telling	someone	when	I’m	sexually	attracted	to	him	or	her.
7.	I	fear	that	I	would	scare	people	away	if	they	knew	what	I	really	felt.

How	many	3’s,	4’s,	 and	5’s	did	you	give	yourself?	 If	you	got	 some,	you’ve



made	 a	 good	 start	 on	 acknowledging	 and	 accepting	 your	 fears	 about	 being
transparent	in	certain	situations.
Let’s	examine	some	of	those	situations.	Are	you	able	to	reveal	certain	things

about	yourself	with	strangers	more	than	with	loved	ones?	Do	you	have	an	easier
time	with	anger	than	with	softer	feelings,	or	vice	versa?	Do	you	lie	orwithhold
mostly	to	ensure	getting	what	you	want?	Or	do	you	try	to	hide	the	fact	that	you
have	 wants?	 Is	 sex	 a	 challenging	 arena	 for	 you?	 Or	 do	 you	 have	 more
insecurities	 regarding	 your	 competence	 at	 work?	Do	 you	worry	 about	 hurting
people?	Do	you	worry	about	getting	hurt?	Do	you	mostly	lie	to	yourself	so	you
won’t	feel	the	pain	of	your	situation	or	so	you	won’t	have	to	confront	others?

The	first	and	most	important	part	of	being	transparent	is
seeing	yourself	without	praise	or	blame.

If	 you	 can	 answer	 these	 questions	 honestly,	 you	 are	 being	 transparent	 right
now,	at	least	with	yourself.	As	you	consider	these	questions,	what	do	you	notice?
What	do	you	sense	in	your	body?	What	feelings	do	you	have?	what	is	your	self-
talk?	Are	you	aware	of	any	theories	or	judgments?	The	first	and	most	important
part	 of	 being	 transparent	 is	 seeing	 yourself	 without	 praise	 or	 blame.	 Seeing
yourself	is	an	act	of	observation,	not	of	evaluation.	This	practice	requires	a	level
of	 competence	with	 truth	 skill	 #1.	 The	 reason	most	 people	 give	 for	 not	 being
transparent	 is	 that	 they	 experience	 a	 gap	 between	 how	 they	 are	 and	 how	 they
think	they	should	be.	Then	they	beat	themselves	up	about	the	disparity	and	try	to
at	least	look	like	how	they	think	they	should	be.	But	now	instead	of	realizing	that
their	 pain	 is	 about	 living	 a	 pretense,	 they	 think	 their	 pain	 is	 about	 not
being“better.”

Any	time	you	feel	unsafe	or	unable	to	be	honest	about
yourself,	it	means	you	have	energy	tied	up	in	a	false	belief,
probably	unconscious,	that	is	still	dictating	your	life	choices.

Let’s	go	back	to	the	questions	about	the	situations	in	which	you	have	trouble
being	truthful.	Any	time	you	feel	unsafe	or	unable	to	be	honest	about	yourself,	it
means	you	have	energy	 tied	up	 in	 a	 false	belief,	 probably	unconscious,	 that	 is



still	 dictating	 your	 life	 choices.	 If	 it’s	 hard	 for	 you	 to	 express	 anger	 or
displeasure,	 for	 example,	 you	 may	 harbor	 the	 belief	 that	 if	 you	 express	 such
feelings	you	will	be	punished.	In	the	introduction,	I	shared	my	fear	of	expressing
anger	 to	 someone	who	 is	 already	 angry	with	me.	 That	 fear	 originated	when	 I
talked	back	to	my	father	and	he	slapped	me	across	the	mouth.	In	psychology,	we
call	that“one-trial	learning.”Although	an	incident	might	happen	only	once,	it	can
still	 leave	 a	 powerful	 imprint	 on	 the	 ego,	 that	 part	 of	 the	 mind	 designed	 to
protect	and	defend	us	against	danger.	An	enduring	false	belief	is	often	the	result
of	this	 type	of	event.	I	call	 this	 type	of	learning“learning	the	wrong	thing.”The
mind,	in	its	overzealous	efforts	to	protect	the	being	that	you	are,	generalizes	the
learning	from	one	incident	to	all	incidents	that	it	finds	similar.
The	work	of	Getting	Real	involves	using	the	ten	truth	skills	to	notice	evidence

of	 and	 then	 reveal	 to	 your	 consciousness	 all	 the	 times	 you	 learned	 the	wrong
thing.	Then	 you	 can	 reevaluate	 your	mind’s	 generalized	 fear	 in	 light	 of	 actual
current	circumstances.	Let’s	say,	for	example,	that	when	you	expressed	anger	as
a	child,	someone	told	you	that	if	you	want	people	to	like	you,	you	shouldn’t	be
angry,	 that	anger	was	ugly.	Maybe	at	 that	 time	you	really	believed	you	needed
everyone	 to	 like	you	or	 to	 find	you	attractive.	But	as	you	have	grown	up,	you
have	 probably	 noticed	 that	 the	 cost	 to	 your	 self-respect	 of	 trying	 to	 please
everyone	is	enormous.	So	now	you	can	reevaluate	your	noanger	policy	in	light
of	your	present	reality.	Noticing	when	you	have	trouble	being	transparent	is	a	big
step.

Getting	Real	in	Dating

Kevin,	 a	 frequent	 participant	 in	 my	 groups,	 submitted	 a	 personal	 ad	 to	 the
Meet	Your	Mate	section	of	his	local	newspaper.	In	the	ad	he	described	himself	as
financially	successful,	when	in	reality	he	is	a	single	parent	struggling	to	support
his	 family,	 has	 no	 savings,	 and	 experiences	 a	 great	 deal	 of	 anxiety	 about	 his
financial	situation.	After	the	ad	was	published,	Kevin	hardly	recognized	himself
when	he	read	it,	and	he	realized	that	he	was	not	able	to	be	transparent	about	his
finances.	 What	 was	 the	 should	 or	 false	 belief	 that	 was	 running	 him?	 he
wondered.	He	 first	 took	 an	 honest	 look	 at	 his	 present	 situation	 in	 an	 effort	 to
simply	experience	what	is.	He	recalled	his	most	recent	financial	interactions	with
friends,	 customers,	 and	 his	 teenage	 children.	 He	 noticed	 a	 tight	 feeling	 in	 his
chest	 and	 some	 shaming	 self-talk.	 Kevin	 got	 a	 clear	 picture	 of	 his	 present



financial	situation	and	just	let	himself	look	at	this	picture	as	soberly	as	possible,
without	denial	or	blame.
Then	 he	 paid	 closer	 attention	 to	 the	 tight	 feeling	 in	 his	 chest.	As	 he	 stayed

with	the	experience	of	tightness,	it	became	a	sharp	pain	near	his	heart.	The	pain
got	more	intense,	and	he	feared	he	might	be	having	a	heart	attack.	This	fear	went
away	after	he	noticed	and	accepted	 it	 rather	 than	working	himself	 into	a	sweat
over	it.	As	he	continued	to	focus	on	the	pain	(instead	of	either	dramatizing	it	or
denying	it,	as	he	was	wont	to	do),	he	got	a	mental	picture	of	a	past	incident	in	his
life.	He	was	about	eight	years	old.	His	parents	and	he	were	all	huddled	behind
the	living	room	couch	in	their	working-class	home	in	north	Philadelphia.	What
was	going	on?	Who	were	we	hiding	from?	Then,	in	his	vision,	he	heard	a	loud
and	persistent	knocking	at	the	front	door.	It	was	a	bill	collector	—	someone	hired
to	collect	money	from	his	father	for	the	various	debts	he	owed.	Kevin	noticed	an
ache	in	his	heart	for	what	he	imagined	was	his	dad’s	pain	and	shame	about	the
situation.	His	dad	was	holding	his	left	hand,	and	Kevin	could	feel	all	the	tension
from	his	father’s	body	entering	his	left	side,	right	into	his	heart.
As	Kevin	stayed	with	his	pain	and	the	imagery	it	produced,	he	began	to	sob.

He	 sobbed	 for	what	 seemed	 like	 a	 long	 time,	 but	 he	 later	 realized	 it	 had	 only
been	about	five	minutes.	While	he	was	sobbing,	he	felt	himself	grow	bigger	and
let	 go	 of	 his	 dad’s	 hand.	 He	 experienced	 sorrow	 for	 his	 dad,	 then	 a	 growing
sense	of	detachment.	When	anger	at	his	dad	came	up,	he	let	himself	feel	that	too.
And	 finally,	Kevin	 saw	 the	 situation	 from	a	broader	perspective.	He	could	 see
the	whole	scene:	his	mom,	his	dad,	and	him	as	a	boy	doing	what	they	felt	they
needed	to	do	at	the	time.	He	felt	compassion	for	the	three	of	them.	He	even	felt
some	compassion	for	 the	faceless,	nameless	bill	collector.	Then	he	sat	down	at
his	 desk	 and	 rewrote	 his	 personal	 ad.	 Now	 he	 included	 in	 his	 ad	 the
words“struggling	 to	 achieve	 financial	 sobriety.”Not	 long	 after	 this	 ad	 was
printed,	 he	met	 a	woman	who	 eventually	 became	 a	 good	 friend.	 She	 also	 had
unresolved	money	issues.	Through	what	he	had	learned	about	himself,	 through
honestly	looking	at	and	experiencing	his	pain,	and	then	through	becoming	more
transparent,	 he	 was	 able	 to	 assist	 his	 new	 friend	 in	 achieving	 a	 more	 sober
relationship	to	money.

Secrets	and	Lies

Another	good	way	to	 let	go	of	unconscious	beliefs	and	 to	see	yourself	more



honestly	 is	 to	 examine	 the	 secrets	 you	 keep	 from	 others.	 I	 have	 never	 met
anyone	 who	 doesn’t	 have	 secrets.	 But	 consider	 this:	 the	 fact	 that	 you	 have
secrets	is	the	same	thing	as	affirming,“If	people	really	knew	me,	they	wouldn’t
accept	me”(translation:“I’m	not	acceptable	as	I	am”).	We	knock	ourselves	out	to
appear	 acceptable	 by	 doing	 things	 that	 reinforce	 the	 feeling	 that	 we	 are	 not.
What	 secrets	 do	 you	 have?	What	 things	 have	 you	 done	 (or	 thought)	 that	 you
wouldn’t	 want	 anyone	 to	 know	 about?	 If	 you	 can	 let	 yourself	 look	 at	 your
secrets,	 you	 can	 learn	 from	 them.	 In	 some	 of	 my	 workshops	 I	 do	 a	 Secrets
Exercise,	 in	 which	 I	 pass	 out	 blank	 three-by-five	 cards	 and	 ask	 people	 to
anonymously	 write	 one	 of	 their	 secrets	 on	 a	 card.	 Then	 I	 collect	 the	 cards,
shuffle	them,	and	pass	them	out	again.	All	the	participants	read	aloud	their	new
card	 (probably	 not	 their	 own	 secret)	 as	 if	 it	 were	 theirs.	 They	 attempt	 to	 feel
what	it	might	feel	like	if	this	secret	belonged	to	them.	They	then	talk	about	what
it	feels	like	to	have	this	secret,	to	have	done,	said,	or	thought	whatever	had	been
reported	on	the	card.	This	exercise	provides	a	healing	experience	for	everyone	in
the	room.	As	you	hear	your	secret	read	aloud	and	discussed	by	someone	else	in
such	a	tender,	intimate	way,	you	see	your	secret	in	a	fresh	light.	Your	secret,	the
thing	you	thought	too	terrible	to	reveal,	starts	to	seem	more	normal.	In	fact,	the
depth	of	self-disclosure	 in	 this	exercise	sometimes	amazes	 the	participants.	 It’s
as	 if	 people	 are	 actually	 dying	 to	 unburden	 their	 darkest	 secrets.	 Perhaps	 they
know	intuitively	that	if	others	could	hear	and	possibly	accept	their	secrets,	they
would	be	provided	with	some	measure	of	reassurance	or	healing.

We	knock	ourselves	out	to	appear	acceptable	by	doing	things
that	reinforce	the	feeling	that	we	are	not.

Perhaps	they	know	intuitively	that	if	others	could	hear	and
possibly	accept	their	secrets,	they	would	be	provided	with
some	measure	of	reassurance	or	healing.

In	one	of	my	groups,	a	man	of	about	 fifty	 shared	a	very	painful	 secret,	 first
anonymously	on	the	card,	and	then	openly	by	claiming	the	secret	as	his	after	it
had	been	read	and	discussed.	His	secret	was	 that	he	felt	 responsible	for	killing
his	 best	 friend	 when	 they	 were	 in	 the	 seventh	 grade.	 Smitty,	 the	 man	 in	 my



group,	 and	 his	 two	 friends,	 John	 and	 Brian,	 his	 very	 best	 friends	 since
kindergarten,	 had	 taken	 Smitty’s	 dad’s	 handgun	 to	 the	 golf	 course	 one	 day	 to
play	around.	Hoping	to	impress	his	friends	with	his	bravery,	Smitty	got	the	idea
of	playing	Russian	roulette.	The	others,	especially	Brian,	protested,	saying	it	was
a	stupid	idea.	But	Smitty	persisted	and	somehow	got	his	friends	to	agree.	Smitty
loaded	one	chamber	of	the	pistol	and	volunteered	to	go	first.	He	spun	the	barrel,
put	 the	gun	 to	his	 temple,	closed	his	eyes	 tightly,	and	pulled	 the	 trigger.	Click.
Nothing	happened.	He	was	 lucky.	Feeling	a	bit	more	confident,	Brian	 took	his
turn	 next.	 But	 this	 time,	 when	 he	 pulled	 the	 trigger,	 it	 went	 off,	 killing	 him
instantly.	All	 these	details	were	not	written	on	the	card.	All	Smitty	had	written
on	 the	card	was,“I	am	responsible	 for	someone’s	death.”But	after	he	heard	 the
person	 read	 the	 card	 with	 such	 heartfelt	 remorse	 and	 with	 such	 compassion,
Smitty	decided	to	speak	up.	He	told	the	entire	story	with	tears	streaming	down
his	 face.	When	 he	 finished,	 a	 hush	 went	 over	 the	 group.	 Several	 other	 group
members	were	crying	with	him.	As	Smitty	 looked	around,	his	sobs	got	deeper.
He	cried	out	to	his	dear	friend’s	memory,	asking	for	forgiveness.	In	subsequent
group	 sessions,	 we	 learned	 that	 this	 confession	 was	 a	 life-changing	 healing
experience	for	Smitty.	He	had	allowed	his	most	shameful	secret	to	be	seen	and
had	experienced	love	instead	of	the	contempt	he	expected.

Being	Transparent	Exercise

Here	is	an	exercise	you	can	do	alone	to	help	you	become	more	transparent.	On
four	different	cards,	write	the	names	of	four	people	you	respect.	Now	shuffle	the
cards	and	turn	them	over.	On	the	other	side	of	each	of	the	cards,	write	your	top
four	 secrets.	 Shuffle	 the	 cards	 again.	Read	 each	 card	 in	 turn,	 starting	with	 the
person’s	 name,	 then	 turning	 the	 card	 over	 and	 reading	 the	 secret.	 If	 the	 secret
belonged	to	this	person,	how	would	that	change	your	opinion	of	him	or	her?	If
you’re	saying	to	yourself	that	it	wouldn’t	change	your	opinion	at	all,	notice	that.
If	 it	 would,	 notice	 that	 too.	 Can	 you	 accept	 other	 peoples’	 dark	 secrets	 more
easily	than	your	own?	Or	is	it	the	other	way	around?

He	had	allowed	his	most	shameful	secret	to	be	seen	and	had
experienced	love	instead	of	the	contempt	he	expected.



Now	pick	one	of	the	secrets	you	have	written	and	feel	your	feelings	associated
with	it.	If	it’s	a	memory	of	something	you	have	done,	feel	the	feelings	you	have
about	having	done	it.	As	you	go	into	the	feeling,	notice	any	tendency	you	may
have	to	run	away	from	it.	Notice	any	judgments	or	imaginings,	then	come	back
to	 the	 feelings.	 If	 they	 take	you	 into	a	memory,	 stay	with	 this	memory.	 If	not,
simply	feel	what	you	feel.	Either	way,	by	experiencing	what	is,	you	allow	light
to	shine	on	one	of	the	dark	places	in	your	psyche,	allowing	this	dark	place	to	be
integrated	 into	 the	 whole	 of	 your	 being.	 Once	 integrated,	 it	 won’t	 have	 any
hidden	power	over	you.

Favorite	Fears

Everyone	 lies,	 everyone	 has	 secrets,	 and	 everyone	 has	 fears,	 so	 there’s	 no
point	 in	 admonishing	 people	 to	 stop	 it.	 What	 works	 better,	 what	 helps	 us	 to
become	more	transparent,	is	to	admit	our	fears	and	to	name	them.	Most	people
have	 one	 or	 two“favorite	 fears.”Some	of	 us	 tend	 to	 fear	 being	 ignored;	 others
fear	being	 singled	out	 for	 attention.	Some	of	us	 fear	 abandonment;	others	 fear
being	smothered.	Some	fear	being	overwhelmed	or	overstimulated,	others	avoid
emptiness	or	having	nothing	to	do.	Frequently	your	favorite	fear	only	emerges	in
certain	types	of	situations.
To	help	you	get	perspective	on	your	fears	and	take	them	more	lightly,	look	at

the	following	list	of	situations	and	put	a	0,	1,	2,	or	3	next	to	each	one,	0	meaning
you’re	 confident	 and	 self-trusting	 in	 this	 situation,	 1	 meaning	 you’d	 be
moderately	shaky	or	unsure	of	yourself	in	this	situation,	2	meaning	you’d	prefer
to	avoid	it,	and	3	meaning	you	hope	never	to	be	faced	with	this	situation.	Then,
after	you	have	given	each	situation	a	rating,	go	down	the	list	again	and	wherever
you	have	put	a	1,	2,	or	3	ask	yourself,	What	do	I	imagine	would	happen	to	me	if
I	were	in	this	situation?	What	specifically	am	I	afraid	of?

Everyone	lies,	everyone	has	secrets,	and	everyone	has	fears,	so
there’s	no	point	in	admonishing	people	to	stop	it.

1.	Telling	a	lover	I	don’t	like	what	they	are	doing	to	pleasure	me.
2.	Being	told	my	lover	isn’t	happy	with	something	I’m	doing	during
lovemaking.



3.	Telling	an	employee	or	coworker	that	I’m	not	satisfied	with	something	they
have	done.

4.	Being	told	by	a	boss,	coworker,	or	customer	that	they	are	unhappy	with	my
work.

5.	Starting	a	conversation	with	someone	I’m	attracted	to.
6.	Having	someone	whom	I’m	not	attracted	to	ask	me	to	accompany	them	to	a
party.

7.	Walking	into	a	gathering	full	of	people	and	doing	something	unusual,
unexpected,	or	foolish	that	makes	everyone	notice	me.

8.	Walking	into	a	gathering	full	of	people	and	having	no	one	notice	me.
9.	Being	asked	to	do	an	assignment	at	work	that	I	think	is	beyond	my
capabilities.

10.	Having	to	give	a	performance	review	to	someone	I	detest	or	don’t	respect.
11.	Being	caught	in	a	lie.
12.	Being	blamed	for	something	I	didn’t	do.
13.	Expressing	a	tender	feeling	and	being	misunderstood.
14.	Being	told	that	I’m	not	good	at	something	that	I	want	to	be	good	at.
15.	Having	my	boss	tell	me	she	is	angry	with	me.
16.	Having	a	customer	tell	me	he	is	angry	with	me.
17.	Having	someone	tell	me	I	have	done	something	that	hurt	her	feelings.
18.	Telling	someone	he	has	done	something	that	I	feel	hurt	about.
19.	Telling	someone	he	has	done	something	that	angers	me.
20.	Telling	someone“it’s	over	between	us.”
21.	Negotiating	for	what	I	want	with	someone	who	is	behaving	in	a	dominating,
threatening	manner.

22.	Telling	someone	she	has	to	leave	my	home	or	office.
23.	Being	told	by	someone	that	he	wants	me	to	leave.
24.	Shedding	tears	in	a	group	meeting.
25.	Having	a	temporary	physical	condition	that	makes	it	necessary	for	me	to	ask
for	help.

26.	Being	asked	for	help	with	some	physical	task.
27.	Being	asked	for	nurturance.
28.	Being	told	to	calm	down	or	to	not	be	emotional.
29.	Being	told	to	shut	up.
30.	Hearing	a	negative	judgment	about	myself.



31.	Letting	someone	know	my	judgments	about	her.
32.	Being	told	by	someone	I	like	that	he	doesn’t	like	something	about	my
personality.

33.	Telling	a	friend	or	mate	that	I	want	to	be	treated	a	certain	way	and	having
her	refuse.

34.	Wanting	my	friend	or	mate	to	pay	attention	to	me	and	being	ignored.
35.	Being	told	to	do	something	that	I	don’t	want	to	do	by	someone	whose
approval	I	seek.

36.	Being	told	I’m	wrong	about	something	I	feel	strongly	about.

Know	Fear

Getting	familiar	with	your	fears	can	help	you	to	take	them	more	lightly.	Many
people	 suffer	 unnecessarily	 because	 they	 try	 to	 hide	what	 they’re	 afraid	 of.	 If
you	 accept	 your	 fears,	 they	won’t	 rule	 your	behavior	 as	much	 as	 if	 you	 try	 to
pretend	they	don’t	exist.	The	exercise	you	just	did	was	to	help	you	identify	the
things	 you	 imagine	 could	happen	 to	 you	 in	 certain	 situations	 that	may	be	 fear
provoking	to	you.	Being	specific	about	what	you	fear	helps	to	eliminate	the	kind
of	generalized	anxiety	 that	many	people	 live	with	every	day.	Often,	when	you
attempt	to	name	what	you	specifically	fear,	you	realize	that	your	fear	is	without
substance.	You	discover	that	your	fear	is	an	imagining	—	probably	related	to	a
false	belief	 that	originated	when	you	were	at	a	much	more	vulnerable	stage	of
life.
If	 you	 do	 have	 a	 specific	 fear	 that	 feels	 powerful	 and	 real,	 take	 the	 time	 to

acknowledge	it	so	you	can	feel	it	fully,	get	down	to	the	false	belief	that	may	lie
beneath	 it,	 and	 clear	 it	 out	 of	 your	 system.	Perhaps	you	will	 discover	 a	desire
underneath	the	fear.	Since	expressing	a	desire	takes	more	emotional	strength	and
courage	 than	 expressing	 a	 fear,	 many	 people	 tend	 to	 express	 their	 fears	 as
a“sideways”method	of	asking	for	what	they	want.	For	example,	Jean	tells	her	co-
worker	 Tara	 that	 she	 is	 afraid	 to	 ask	 for	 Tara’s	 help	 with	 her	 project.	 She
imagines	 that	 Tara	 is	 too	 busy.	When	 Jean	 checks	 in	with	 herself	 to	 discover
what	she	specifically	fears,	she	finds	 it’s	about	being	 told	no.	Once	she	admits
this,	she	is	able	to	see	the	want	underneath	the	fear.
Now	 she	 can	 say	 to	 Tara,“I’d	 like	 your	 input	 on	 this	 project.”After

acknowledging	 the	fear	of	being	 told	no,	she	realized	 that	hearing	no	 is	not	so
scary	after	all.	It	was	more	frightening	when	it	was	a	vague	sense	of	dread.	Now



that	Jean	has	named	the	fear,	it	doesn’t	seem	so	serious	and	she	can	let	go	of	it
and	simply	express	what	she	wants.

Often,	when	you	attempt	to	name	what	you	specifically	fear,
you	realize	that	your	fear	is	without	substance.

Remember,	when	you	try	to	ignore	your	fear	and	push	it	into	the	background,
it	won’t	go	away.	 Instead,	 it	will	 either	 create	 confusion	 in	your	perception	of
what’s	 true	 or	 it	 will	 lead	 to	 a	 lack	 of	 authenticity	 in	 the	 way	 you	 express
yourself.	So	if	authenticity	is	your	goal,	acknowledge	your	fear,	clarify	what	it’s
about,	and	let	it	fade	away.

Being	Transparent	in	Marriage

If	your	mate	just	bought	you	an	expensive	birthday	gift	but	it’s	something	you
don’t	like	and	will	probably	never	use,	what	would	you	do?	You	might	be	afraid
of	appearing	unappreciative	or	of	hurting	your	mate’s	feelings.	Yet	you	probably
won’t	be	able	to	successfully	hide	your	true	feelings.	I	suggest	you	think	of	your
dilemma	as	an	opportunity	to	be	transparent,	to	show	your	vulnerability	(which
means	your	ability	to	be	affected	by	things).	You	might	say,“Darling,	I	have	been
afraid	 to	 tell	 you	 this...	 I	 feel	 shaky	 in	my	body	 as	 I	 speak...	 but	 I	want	 to	 be
completely	transparent	with	you.	I	appreciate	you	for	getting	me	such	a	generous
gift.	And	at	the	same	time	I	want	to	let	you	know	that	it’s	not	my	taste.	I	want	us
to	be	completely	honest	with	each	other,	even	if	it’s	painful	sometimes.”

If	you	do	have	a	specific	fear	that	feels	powerful	and	real,	take
the	time	to	acknowledge	it	so	you	can	feel	it	fully,	get	down	to
the	false	belief	that	may	lie	beneath	it,	and	clear	it	out	of	your
system.

You	may	 be	 thinking	 to	 yourself,“That	 is	 a	 fairly	 good	way	 to	 say	 it,	 but	 I
don’t	 think	on	my	feet	 that	fast.”Well,	neither	do	most	people.	So	in	real	 time,
you	might	hide	your	 true	 feelings	 at	 first	 and	 then	have	 to	 come	back	 to	your
mate	later	and	come	clean.	(Chapter	8	covers	this	topic	in	depth.)	That’s	the	best



most	of	us	can	do	when	we’re	first	starting	out	with	Getting	Real.	That’s	okay.
Being	 transparent	 doesn’t	 mean	 being	 perfect	 or	 polished	 in	 your	 honesty.	 It
means	showing	yourself,	warts	and	all.

The	Freedom	to	Screw	Up

Now	let’s	consider	the	connection	between	fear	and	freedom.	As	the	subtitle
of	 this	 chapter	 states,	 freedom’s	 just	 another	word	 for	 nothing	 left	 to	 hide.	As
long	as	you	have	something	you	can’t	let	yourself	or	others	see,	you’re	limiting
your	freedom.	I’m	not	telling	you	to	share	everything	that	comes	into	your	mind.
But	 if	 you	 are	 not	 able	 to	 express	 something,	 if	 you	 are	 compelled	 to	 keep	 it
hidden,	then	you	are	not	free	to	choose	an	authentic	response	to	each	situation.
Revealing	your	truth	is	a	discovery	process.	Sometimes	you’ll	take	a	risk	and

disclose	something	and	then	realize	it	was	not	what	you	meant	or	that	it	doesn’t
represent	how	you	now	feel.	It	may	have	seemed	true	at	the	time,	but	now	you
see	 something	 you	 didn’t	 see	 before,	 or	 maybe	 your	 feelings	 have	 changed.
That’s	why	it’s	a	good	idea	to	create	a	support	system	for	yourself	in	your	effort
to	 become	 more	 transparent.	 You	 need	 people	 who	 will	 give	 you	 a	 second
chance	 when	 you	 screw	 up	 —	 who	 will	 allow	 you	 to“go	 out	 and	 come	 in
again,”as	 chapter	 8	 describes.	You	 need	 people	 around	 you	who	 agree	 to	Get
Real	together.	You	need	people	who	want	to	know	you	and	to	know	themselves
—	people	who	place	a	higher	value	on	relating	than	on	controlling.

As	long	as	you	have	something	you	can’t	let	yourself	or	others
see,	you’re	limiting	your	freedom.

My	partner	and	I	have	a	way	of	making	all	truths	feel	safe.	If	we	imagine	that
something	may	be	difficult	for	the	other	to	hear,	we	begin	our	disclosure	with	the
words,“In	the	interest	of	transparency....”This	phrase	signals	a	benevolent	intent,
even	 if	 the	 information	 is	 hard	 to	 take	 in.	 When	 you	 preface	 your	 anger	 or
resentment	 this	way,	 it	 helps	you	 stay	 connected	 to	 the	 intent“to	know	and	be
known,”to	share	information	about	you	and	your	feelings,	and	it	keeps	you	from
sliding	 into	 using	 your	 self-expressions	 as	 punishment	 or	 as	 a	way	 to	 control.
Mainly,	though,	it	helps	you	manage	your	own	fears	about	the	disclosure.	Once
it	becomes	understood	between	you	and	another	person	that	all	disclosures,	even



anger	and	disappointment,	are	in	the	interest	of	transparency,	the	preamble	will
no	 longer	be	needed.	 I	 think	of	 this	phrase	as	 the	 training	wheels	you	can	use
while	you	are	learning	to	speak	and	deliver	difficult	truths.

Creating	Real	Community

Getting	Real	 is	 a	 process	 to	be	 shared	with	 like-minded	others.	We	 learn	 to
accept	our	own	dark	or	hidden	aspects	by	first	disclosing	them	to	others	and	then
feeling	 their	acceptance.	Acceptance	does	not	equal	approval	or	agreement	but
rather	 a	 willingness	 to	 stay	 engaged.	 You’ll	 need	 to	 find	 people	 who	 value
learning	 to	hear	 truth	more	 than	 they	value	being	comfortable.	This	may	seem
impossible	as	you	look	around	at	your	circle	of	friends.	That’s	why	I	created	the
Getting	Real	Card	Game	 as	 a	 companion	 to	 this	 book.	 (See	 appendix	C	 for	 a
description	and	ordering	information.)	Just	about	everyone	can	enjoy	the	game
—	without	committing	themselves	to	any	particular	level	of	self-disclosure.	You
may	 be	 surprised	 to	 learn	 that	 people	 you	 never	 thought	 of	 as	 emotionally
courageous	are	actually	quite	ready	to	Get	Real	when	they	feel	permission	to	do
so.

Who	Are	You	Protecting?

Many	people	experience	 fear	only	when	certain“taboo”thoughts	or	emotions
come	up	—	such	as	anger,	judgmental	thoughts,	or	emotional	or	sexual	hunger.
Most	of	us	learned	the“right”way	to	express“unacceptable”thoughts	or	emotions
a	long	time	ago.	In	most	cases,“right”meant	without	making	a	mess	or	without
making	other	people	uncomfortable.	When	we	were	little,	our	parents	probably
became	uncomfortable	(or	worse)	when	we	complained,	threw	fits,	played	with
ourselves,	or	couldn’t	be	satisfied,	so	we	learned	to	keep	the	lid	on	these	things.
We	 learned	 either	 to	 protect	 others	 from	 feeling	 uncomfortable	 or	 to	 protect
ourselves	from	their	reactions	to	us.	As	adults	we	continue	protecting	people.	We
continue	 to	 believe	 we	 can	 protect	 people	 by	 avoiding	 anything	 we	 imagine
would	make	them	uncomfortable.	Thus,	we	confuse	their	discomfort	zone	with
our	own,	as	we	try	to	protect	them	at	the	cost	of	our	own	well-being.

We	continue	to	believe	we	can	protect	people	by	avoiding



anything	we	imagine	would	make	them	uncomfortable.

What	 do	you	believe	would	happen	 if	 you	 stopped	 trying	 to	 protect	 others?
What	could	another	person	do	to	you?	How	could	he	or	she	hurt	you?	Let’s	look
at	the	beliefs	and	baggage	you	carry	around	about	your	ability	to	handle	strong
feelings.	Let’s	open	some	of	 those	old	bags	 to	 see	what’s	 inside.	When	 I	have
asked	workshop	participants	 to	 do	 this,	 here	 are	 some	of	 the	 things	 they	 have
said:
“My	mom	hit	me	whenever	I	talked	back.	I’m	still	afraid	of	being	hit	—	even

though	that	seems	ridiculous	to	me	in	this	moment.”
“I	think	my	mom	withdrew	from	me	when	I	cried	too	much.	I	think	it	made

her	feel	like	a	bad	mother.	So	now	I	imagine	that	if	I’m	not	satisfied	in	sex,	my
partner	will	withdraw.”
“My	mom	criticized	me	when	I	called	attention	to	myself.	Now	I’m	afraid	to

show	it	when	I’m	feeling	really	needy	for	affection	or	attention.	I	try	to	remain
pretty	much	invisible.”
“My	dad	flew	off	the	handle	a	lot,	and	my	mom	thought	he	was	a	jerk.	So	now

I	think	if	I	show	anger,	people	will	judge	me	as	a	jerk.”
“When	I	got	really	exuberant	as	a	little	kid,	my	dad	mocked	me.	He	made	fun

of	me.	I	got	the	idea	that	being	happy	and	joyful	meant	you	were	stupid.”
If	you	are	like	most	people,	you	probably	have	a	story	about	how	you	arrived

at	 the	 beliefs	 you	 now	 hold.	 Everyone	 I	 know	 has	 a	 past	 that	 clouds	 their
perception	 of	 the	 truth.	 Where	 anger,	 sex,	 neediness,	 and	 joy	 are	 concerned,
people	need	a	lot	of	help	from	their	friends	to	Get	Real.	We	can’t	underestimate
how	 strongly	 we’ve	 been	 socialized	 into	 suppressing	 ourselves.	 We	 need
supportive	 others	 to	 provide	 us	 with	 what	 psychotherapists	 call“a	 corrective
emotional	 experience,”an	 experience	 of	 someone	we	 care	 about	 receiving	 our
uninhibited	expression	of	feelings	with	acceptance.

The	Unfinished	Business	Exercise

One	of	the	most	liberating	and	energizing	exercises	we	do	in	the	Getting	Real
workshop	is	 the	unfinished	business	exercise.	Each	person	picks	a	partner	who
will	 take	 on	 the	 role	 of	 someone	 in	 their	 past	 from	whom	 they	 have	withheld
significant	 feelings	 in	 the	 area	 of	 anger,	 sex,	 or	 desires.	 Usually	 we	 work	 on
withheld	anger	first.	If	you	are	my	partner,	I	sit	facing	you	and	allow	my	feelings



to	 come	 to	 the	 surface.	 Then	 I	 let	 my	 anger	 and	 resentments	 fly,	 using	 the
phrase“I	resent	you	for___”(followed	by	something	specific	that	this	person	did,
said,	or	did	not	do).	The	other	person	is	instructed	to	be	as	neutral	as	possible	so
as	to	be	a	good	projection	screen.
I	 ask	 people	 to	 do	 each	 round	 for	 at	 least	 five	 minutes.	 If	 they	 run	 out	 of

withheld	emotions,	 they	can	 repeat	 themselves.	 In	 fact,	 they	are	encouraged	 to
repeat	 themselves	 when	 the	 feeling	 is	 especially	 strong.	 At	 the	 end	 of	 this
exercise,	people	are	laughing	and	crying	and	hugging	one	another	and	jumping
up	and	down.	They’re	like	little	kids	again	—	open,	free,	spontaneous.	What	has
happened?	They	report	 feelings	 like:“I	 let	her	have	 it,	and	 the	roof	didn’t	cave
in!	 I’m	 still	 here.”“I	 didn’t	 know	 I	 had	 that	 much	 juice	 bottled	 up	 in	 me!
Wow!”“I	was	really	angry,	and	I	could	also	feel	love	and	compassion	once	I	got
the	anger	out.”
It	seems	that	people	are	dying	to“let	it	all	hang	out”—	especially	when	taboo

feelings	 are	 concerned.	 They	 just	 need	 permission	 to	 do	 so.	 Of	 course,	 there
aren’t	 a	 lot	 of	 settings	 in	 which	 this	 permission	 exists	 in	 most	 people’s	 daily
lives.	But	you	can	build	this	support	into	your	life.	If	your	experience	is	anything
like	mine,	you	will	find	that	meeting	regularly	with	a	group	of	people	who	value
Getting	Real	will	give	you	the	courage	you	need	to	be	yourself,	even	beyond	the
safety	of	the	group	setting.	For	several	years	now,	I	have	been	hosting	a	monthly
practice	group	for	people	who	have	 taken	my	one-day	Getting	Real	workshop.
We’re	 all	 finding	 that	 the	 more	 we	 practice	 expressing	 taboo	 thoughts	 and
feelings	with	one	 another,	 the	more	 authentic	 and	 confident	we	become	 in	 the
rest	 of	 our	 lives.	 Group	 members	 report	 being	 more	 real	 with	 their	 parents,
bosses,	coworkers,	and	mates.

The	Resentments/Appreciations	Clearing	Practice

I	teach	a	number	of	clearing	rituals	that	support	people	being	transparent	with
one	 another.	 Ritualizing	 honest	 communication,	 that	 is	 setting	 aside	 a	 special
time	 and	 place	 for	 expressing	 withheld	 feelings,	 makes	 everything	 feel	 safer.
People	 are	more	 likely	 to	 view	 a	 ritual	 as	 an	 awareness	 and	 clearing	 practice
rather	 than	 as	 a	 threat.	 The	most	 popular	 clearing	 ritual	 is	 the	Gestalt	 therapy
exercise	of	sharing	resentments	and	appreciations.
To	 do	 the	 practice,	 you’ll	 need	 one	 or	 more	 people	 who	 agree	 to	 be	 your

practice	 partner(s).	 Ask	 them	 to	 read	 this	 book	 so	 they	 can	 understand	 the



rationale	for	the	regular	sharing	of	resentments	and	appreciations.	If	you	are	in	a
relationship,	your	mate	would	be	the	ideal	person	to	do	it	with.	In	the	following
section,	I	have	reprinted	the	guidelines	I	offer	to	couples	in	my	Relating	More,
Controlling	Less	 couples	workshops.	 If	 you	 are	 not	 part	 of	 a	 couple,	 you	 can
adapt	this	material	to	fit	your	situation.

Suggestions	for	Your	Regular“R	and	A”Practice

1.	Decide	together	how	often	you	will	do	the	ritual:	every	day,	every	other	day,
weekly,	and	so	on.

2.	Choose	one	member	of	the	couple	to	initiate	the	process	(as	in,“When	is	a
good	time	to	do	our	resentments	and	appreciations?	Is	now	a	good	time?”)
Take	turns	being	the	initiator,	one	week	at	a	time.

3.	Designate	a	safe,	sacred	space	for	the	ritual	by	choosing	a	place	in	your
home	or	yard	where	you	will	be	uninterrupted	and	where	you	can	sit	facing
each	other.	It’s	helpful	to	do	the	ritual	in	the	same	place	every	time	you	do
it.	That	way	when	you	walk	into	this	room	or	area,	you	have	the	sense	that
you	are	entering	a	different	mind-set	—	a	mind-set	in	which	you	set	aside
any	need	to	prove	your	point	or	bolster	your	position.	Your	aim	is
transparency	—	to	know	and	be	known.	Revealing	resentments	is	an	act	of
making	yourself	vulnerable.	We	may	fear	that	our	resentments	will	appear
selfish	or	petty	or	unenlightened	and	that	it’s	a	risk	to	reveal	them.	Some
people	like	to	sanctify	the	space	by	doing	something	like	lighting	a	candle,
smudging,	or	burning	incense.

4.	Decide	on	time	limits	for	each	person’s	turn.	You	can	take	less	time	than
your	limit,	but	not	more.

5.	When	it	is	the	other	person’s	turn,	don’t	interrupt	(except	if	you	need	to
remind	them	to	be	more	specific.	Then	ask,“Can	you	be	specific?”).

6.	Use	the	words“I	resent/appreciate	you	for___”	(and	be	specific	about	what
the	other	did,	said,	or	did	not	do).

7.	If	your	partner	is	making	an	interpretation	without	giving	you	the	data	this	is
based	on	ask,“Can	you	be	specific?”This	is	a	signal	for	the	partner	to
recognize	that	she	or	he	is	imagining	or	interpreting.	It	also	gives	you	the
time	to	get	centered	so	that	you’ll	be	less	apt	to	overreact.

8.	If	after	trying,	you	can’t	be	specific,	then	use	a	phrase	like:“I	resent	you	for
what	I	interpret	(or	imagine)	as	your	inability	to	hear	my	anger.”(Better	still



would	be:“I	resent	you	for	not	looking	at	me	and	for	moving	away	from	me
when	I	expressed	my	anger.”)

9.	Speak	only	about	what	you	experienced:	what	you	saw,	heard,	sensed,	or
felt.	If	you	must	base	your	resentment	or	appreciation	on	an	interpretation	or
imagining,	okay;	but	try	first	to	see	if	you	can	recall	something	specific	that
happened.	Usually	people	find	it	easiest	to	state	what	was	not	done,	as	in“I
resent	you	for	not	telling	me	you	appreciate	the	back	rub	I	gave	you.”This
signals	that	you	had	an	expectation	that	was	disappointed	and	that	you’re
taking	responsibility	for	it.	Try	not	to	limit	yourself	to	these	kinds	of
resentments,	because	your	partner	actually	did	do	something	that	triggered
the	resentment.

10.	At	the	end	of	the	process,	share	something	that	you	appreciate	about
yourself.	And	end	it	by	appreciating	each	other	for	engaging	in	the	practice.

I	 suggest	using	 this	 form	for	 several	 reasons.	First,	 saying“I”helps	keep	you
grounded	 in	your	own	experience.	Second,	using	 an“I	 .	 .	 .	 you”sentence	helps
you	feel	the	connection	between	you	and	the	other	person.	It	helps	train	you	to
not	 be	 afraid	 of	 giving	 or	 receiving	 strong	 contact,	 and	 it	 helps	 you	 not	 lose
yourself	 in	 the	 face	 of	 strong	 contact.	 The	 ability	 to	make	 strong	 contact	 is	 a
prerequisite	for	intimacy.	Third,	stating	what	the	other	specifically	did	or	didn’t
do	 helps	 create	 a	 felt	 sense	 in	 your	 body,	 helping	 you	 to	move	 through	 your
feelings	 and	 past	 them	 to	 forgiveness.	 Being	 specific	 also	 eliminates	 the
temptation	to	argue	over	conflicting	interpretations.	It	helps	keep	you	focused	on
one	 person’s	 actual	 memory	 of	 what	 happened	 rather	 than	 on	 that	 person’s
interpretation.	 Being	 specific	 is	 harder	 for	 some	 people	 than	 for	 others,	 but	 it
will	get	easier	as	you	feel	safer	doing	the	practice.	Even	if	you	can	only	partially
recall	the	specifics,	they	are	still	helpful.	Don’t	get	perfectionistic	about	it.

The	ability	to	make	strong	contact	is	a	prerequisite	for
intimacy.

Please	 do	 not	 assume	 that	when	 your	 partner	 only	 gives	 you	 a	 few	 specific
details	that	these	details	represent	the	full	picture	of	what	he	or	she	is	resenting
or	appreciating.	In	other	words,	don’t	expect	complete	accuracy	of	detail.	If	your
partner	can	only	remember	part	of	what	you	said	or	did,	try	not	to	let	your“I’m
being	misunderstood”button	get	pushed.	See	 if	you	can	be	 spacious	enough	 to



allow	the	other	to	have	feelings,	even	if	they	cause	you	pain	or	upset.	Just	notice
your	upset	and	the	thoughts	and	feelings	associated	with	it.	You	can	express	this
as	a	resentment	when	it’s	your	turn.
Fourth,	even	appreciations	are	to	be	gotten	over	so	that	you	can	detach	from

your	ideas	about	what	 things	mean	and	stay	open	to	what	is.	Spiritual	 freedom
comes	from	participating	in	the	moment-by-moment	flow	of	life,	not	by	getting
things	to	be	just	right	once	and	for	all.	Fifth,	this	clearing	ritual	is	an	awareness
practice	as	well	as	a	communication	tool.	It	helps	you	develop	a	more	spacious,
less	 reactive	consciousness.	 It	helps	you	continually	clear	 away	old	unfinished
business	 so	you	 can	be	present	 to	what	 is	 actually	 going	 on.	 It	 helps	 free	 you
from	 the	 need	 to	 control	 how	 others	 view	 you.	 It	 helps	 you	 get	 over	 feeling
responsible	 for	 another’s	 feelings.	 It	 teaches	 you	 that	 you	 can	 listen	 to
viewpoints	 that	 differ	 from	 yours	 without	 losing	 your	 own.	 It	 helps	 you	 trust
yourself	in	facing	the	unknown.
And	last,	the“I	.	.	 .	you”form	does	not	imply	that	the	other	is	responsible	for

your	feelings.	You	can	resent	someone	for	something	she	did	without	holding	the
belief	that	she	did	something	wrong	or	caused	your	reaction	or	that	you	are	right.
A	feeling	is	just	a	feeling	—	neither	right	nor	wrong.	And	only	you	know	what
your	feelings	are.	Refrain	from	telling	the	other	about	him-or	herself.	Talk	about
yourself.	The	R	and	A	clearing	ritual	can	be	used	with	anyone	you’re	close	to	or
would	like	to	feel	closer	to.	Many	people	discover	that	after	doing	it	with	their
parents(s),	what	had	been	a	lifeless	or	strained	relationship	comes	alive	again.

Spiritual	freedom	comes	from	participating	in	the	moment-
by-moment	flow	of	life,	not	by	getting	things	to	be	just	right
once	and	for	all.

Being	Transparent	with	a	Parent

Remember	 Smitty,	 the	 man	 who	 felt	 responsible	 for	 the	 death	 of	 his	 best
friend?	In	our	workshop,	Smitty	reported	that	after	talking	about	his	resentments
toward	 his	 mother	 in	 our	 group	 he	 was	 able	 to	 visit	 her	 and	 clean	 up	 his
unfinished	business	in	person.
Right	 after	 the	 shooting,	 his	 mother	 was	 informed	 by	 the	 police	 about	 the

incident.	 Smitty	 was	 at	 the	 station	 for	 questioning	 all	 afternoon	 but	 was	 not



booked	for	a	crime.	When	he	finally	did	come	home	to	supper,	she	was	so	angry
that	 as	 soon	 as	 he	walked	 in	 the	 house,	 she	 screamed,“Get	 out	 of	my	 sight!	 I
don’t	ever	want	to	see	you	again!”In	spite	of	the	fact	that	she	soon	recanted	those
words,	this	painful	incident	was	lodged	in	Smitty’s	memory.	While	he	was	doing
the	unfinished	business	exercise	with	a	partner,	the	memory	came	back	to	him.
When	it	was	over,	he	decided	that	he	must	go	and	see	his	mother	in	person	and
tell	her	of	the	pain	her	words	had	caused	him	and	perhaps	listen	to	her	pain	as
well.
In	the	group	session	after	the	meeting	with	his	mother,	Smitty	reported	how	it

had	gone.	He	told	her	he	had	been	going	to	a	group	about	Getting	Real,	and	he
related	some	of	 the	 things	he	was	 learning	about	himself:	about	how	 the	mind
stores	false	beliefs,	how	unfinished	business	clogs	up	current	perceptions,	and	so
forth.	He	told	her	about	sharing	resentments	as	a	clearing	practice	—	a	practice
for	 expressing	 withheld	 feelings	 so	 you	 can	 let	 go	 of	 them	 and	 move	 on	 to
forgiveness.	 And	 then	 he	 told	 her	 that	 he’d	 been	 holding	 on	 to	 some	 major
resentments	in	relation	to	her	and	that	his	intent	was	to	share	these	so	he	could
get	over	them.	She	agreed	to	just	sit	and	listen	and	wait	for	him	to	finish	before
she	replied.	Then	it	would	be	her	turn	to	speak.	He	started	right	out	with	the	big
one:“I	resent	you	for	saying’	get	out	of	here,	I	don’t	ever	want	to	see	you	again’
on	the	day	Brian	died.”He	repeated	it	another	time,	this	time	in	a	louder	voice.
Then	he	 continued	with	 a	 number	 of	 other	 resentments	 about	 other	 things	 she
had	 said	 to	 him.	 He	 was	 in	 tears	 by	 the	 time	 he	 got	 in	 touch	 with	 some
appreciations,	and	he	shared	these	too.
When	it	was	her	turn	to	speak,	his	mother	was	crying	too.	She	thanked	him	for

the	conversation,	which	she	said	she	found	frightening	and	painful	but	real.	Then
she	 told	 him	 something	 he	 never	 would	 have	 known	 if	 he	 hadn’t	 shared	 his
resentments:	when	she	was	a	child,	she	had	been	responsible	for	her	little	sister
losing	her	right	hand	in	an	accident.	And	her	mother,	when	she	was	told	about	it,
had	 said	almost	 the	exact	 same	 thing	 to	her,“Get	out	of	here.	 I	 can’t	 stand	 the
sight	of	you.”Smitty’s	mom	had	never	revealed	these	things	to	anyone,	not	even
to	her	husband.	The	opportunity	to	share	this	painful	memory	with	her	son	was	a
breakthrough	in	their	relationship	as	well	as	in	her	ability	to	forgive	herself	for
what	 had	 happened	 to	 her	 sister.	 After	 that	 conversation,	 Smitty	 saw	 the
incidents	 that	 happened	 years	 ago	 surrounding	 Brian’s	 death	 in	 a	 whole	 new
light.	 Experiences	 such	 as	 this	 keep	 reminding	 me	 how	 much	 healing	 and
transformation	is	possible	if	we	could	just	stop	hiding	and	let	ourselves	be	seen.



Taboo	Feelings	in	the	Here	and	Now

Once	people	accept	that	they	do	feel	anger	and	other	strong	feelings,	they	can
take	 them	 more	 in	 stride.	 Sometimes	 in	 my	 workshops	 I	 like	 to	 give	 people
practice	expressing	themselves	to	the	other	people	in	the	room:“I	resent	you	for
what	you	just	said,”“I’m	sexually	attracted	to	you	and	you	and	you,”“I	long	for
you	 to	 hold	 me	 and	 support	 my	 head	 with	 your	 hand,”“My	 self-talk	 is	 a
judgment	about	what	you	just	said.”
Again,	when	people	do	this,	they	report	feeling	lighter	and	freer.	One	woman,

after	 such	 a	 session,	 exclaimed,“I	 feel	 like	 I’m	 carrying	 around	 less
weight!”Another	marveled,“This	 is	 fun!	 If	 I’d	known	unloading	my	anger	was
so	freeing,	I’d	have	done	it	a	long	time	ago.”Once	people	accept	these	formerly
taboo	 feelings,	 they	 take	 them	 more	 lightly	 and	 not	 as	 personally.	 They
experience“now	I	feel	it	 .	 .	 .	now	I	express	it...	now	it’s	over...	I’m	finished...	I
can	 get	 on	 with	 whatever	 needs	 my	 attention	 next.”They	 learn	 the	 joy	 and
relaxation	that	comes	with	being	fully	self-expressed.	They	learn	to	participate	in
the	ever-changing	flow	of	life	rather	than	trying	to	get	their	lives	to	be	just	right.

Once	people	accept	these	formerly	taboo	feelings,	they	take
them	more	lightly	and	not	as	personally.	They
experience“now	I	feel	it...	now	I	express	it...	now	it’s	over...
I’m	finished...	I	can	get	on	with	whatever	needs	my	attention
next.”

Expressing	Judgments

Most	people	hide	their	judgmental	thoughts.	In	Getting	Real,	the	goal	is	to	be
able	to	take	our	own	and	others’	judgments	less	seriously,	recognizing	that	being
judgmental,	while	not	always	very	productive,	is	an	extremely	common	control
pattern.	So	you’re	having	judgmental	thoughts?	Join	the	club!
Admitting	that	you	have	a	judgment	about	what	someone	did	or	said	is	an	act

of	 self-revelation.	 You’re	 taking	 responsibility	 for	 the	 judgment	 rather	 than
projecting	it	onto	someone	else.	By	seeing	it,	owning	it,	and	sharing	it,	you’ll	get
more	distance	from	it	and	get	over	it	more	quickly.	Noticing	your	judgments	also



helps	you	to	own	your	projections	(the	subject	of	chapter	7).	In	other	words,	you
express	the	judgment,	but	you	do	not	act	it	out.	Acting	out	a	feeling	is	when	you
hit	 someone	 over	 the	 head	 with	 it;	 expressing	 a	 feeling	 serves	 the	 goal	 of
transparency.

They	learn	the	joy	and	relaxation	that	comes	with	being	fully
self-expressed.

Furthermore,	 learning	 to	 accept	 that	 you	 have	 judgments	 or	 other	 self-
defeating	thought	patterns	can	help	you	develop	compassion	for	yourself.	Often
the	best	way	to	find	compassion	is	to	start	by	noticing	its	absence	—	like	when
you	 judge	 yourself	 for	 being	 judgmental.	 When	 you	 catch	 yourself	 judging
yourself	 or	 others,	 it’s	 very	 healing	 to	 have	 a	 safe	 place	 to	 admit	 it	—	 in	 the
interest	of	transparency,	not	as	something	you’re	attached	to.	Sharing	your	self-
talk	and	letting	your	judgments	be	seen	by	others	helps	you	get	a	more	objective
perspective	 on	 that	 critical	 inner	 voice.	 Then	 you	 don’t	 identify	 with	 it	 so
strongly:	it’s	simply	something	you	are	noticing.
Are	 there	ways	 by	which	 you	 inhibit	 your	 full	 self-expression?	Do	 you	 use

obvious	 addictions	 like	 smoking	or	drinking?	Do	you	have	 an	 inner	 critic	 that
won’t	quit?	Or	do	you	avoid	situations	in	which	you	might	feel	too	high	or	too
low?	Most	 people	 were	 conditioned	 as	 children	 to	 keep	 their	 behavior	 within
fairly	 narrow	 limits.	 Those	 limits	 that	 limit	 our	 expression,	 and	 therefore	 our
freedom,	are	what	we	call	our	comfort	zone.	Now	we’re	adults	and	can	handle
the	consequences	of	fuller	expression,	but	we	have	forgotten	how	to	be	at	home
with	deep	or	 intense	 feelings.	And	we	still	hold	on	 to	 the	notion	 that	doing	so
would	be	too	uncomfortable.	But	I	have	never	found	this	to	be	the	case.	Busting
out	of	your	comfort	zone	might	be	the	most	fun	thing	you	ever	did	—	after	you
get	over	 the	idea	that	you	have	to	be	safe,	appropriate,	perfect,	right	—	or	that
you	have	to	be	anything.

Admitting	that	you	have	judgment	about	what	someone	did
or	said	is	an	act	of	selfrevelation.

The	way	back	to	being	fully	self-expressive	is	to	begin	by	noticing	when	we



cut	 ourselves	 off	 and	 then	 to	 openly	 share	 what	 we	 notice.	 Even	 if	 we	 don’t
realize	until	many	hours	or	days	later	that	we	have	been	untrue	to	ourselves,	we
can	still	share	our	deeper	truth	when	we	finally	do	realize	it.	Chapter	8,“Revising
an	Earlier	Statement,”describes	some	ways	to	do	this.

Being	Transparent	in	a	Nutshell

•	Being	transparent	enables	you	to	express	and	release	emotions	without
getting	stuck	in	them.	For	example,	sometimes	after	you	report	a	judgmental
thought,	it	disappears;	or	after	you	have	been	suppressing	a	deep	emotional
longing,	like	a	longing	to	be	touched,	you	may	find	that	with	its	expression
comes	a	sense	of	relief	or	relaxation.	You	are	no	longer	contracting,	no
longer	holding	back.	Feeling	and	expressing	things	that	have	been	withheld
often	lead	to	feeling	more	relaxed	and	whole.	Your	energy	is	flowing	again,
and	with	this	renewed	energy	comes	a	sense	of	inner	peace.

•	Withholding	feelings	is	a	way	of	giving	them	more	significance	than	they
actually	deserve.	No	one	feeling	is	such	a	big	deal	—	except	if	you	hold	on
to	it	and	don’t	allow	it	to	be	expressed.	When	you	express	a	feeling,	it
usually	changes	or	dissolves.

•	Any	time	you	notice	yourself	lying,	pretending,	or	withholding,	you	can	use
this	information	to	help	you	get	back	into	the	flow	of	life,	to	get	your	energy
moving	again	in	a	direction	that	you	choose.

•	Hiding	is	a	treatable	condition.	It	is	not	terminal.	But	it	does	signal	that	there
is	an	energy	block	in	your	system,	probably	based	on	some	false	belief	that
you	took	on	years	ago.

•	The	way	out	of	such	a	block	is	into	and	through:	feel	your	feelings;	sense
your	body;	and	notice	your	thoughts,	fears,	and	imaginings.	Be	still	and	pay
attention.	Listen.	Focus.	tions.	Experience	what	is.	Learning	to	be
transparent	depends	on	your	ability	to	notice	and	experience	current	reality,
both	the	good	news	and	the	bad.

Busting	out	of	your	comfort	zone	might	be	the	most	fun	thing
you	ever	did	—	after	you	get	over	the	idea	that	you	have	to	be
safe,	appropriate,	perfect,	right	—	or	that	you	have	to	be
anything.



•	Revealing	your	self-talk	as	you	notice	it	helps	you	get	over	your
identification	with	the	ego-mind.	It’s	a	good	first	step	toward	freeing
yourselffrom	taking	the	mind’s	shoulds	and	judgments	too	seriously.

•	When	you	practice	these	suggestions	with	others	who	have	read	this	book
and	agreed	to	support	you	in	Getting	Real,	you’ll	find	you	have	a	lot	of	fun.
You’ll	learn	to	laugh	at	your	mind’s	machinations.

The	way	back	to	being	fully	self-expressive	is	to	begin	by
noticing	when	we	cut	ourselves	off	and	then	to	openly	share
what	we	notice.



CHAPTER	4
NOTICING	YOUR	INTENT

IS	IT	TO	RELATE	OR
TO	CONTROL?

Sara	heard	her	teenage	daughter,	Heather,	rummaging	around	in	the	kitchen.
“She	must’ve	just	gotten	home	from	school,”	Sara	thought,	as	she	walked	into
the	kitchen	to	greet	her	daughter.	Then	she	looked	down	at	the	floor	and	let	out	a
screech:	“Aaaaggh!	How	did	all	that	mud	get	in	here?	Didn’t	I	tell	you	to	wipe
your	feet	every	time	you	come	in?”	Heather,	looking	sullen,	left	the	room
immediately	and	went	upstairs	to	her	room	without	saying	a	word.
Was	 there	 another	way	 in	which	Sara	might	 have	 expressed	 her	 displeasure

about	the	mud	on	her	freshly	polished	floor?	Let’s	consider	the	intent	of	Sara’s
communication	with	her	daughter.	Sara’s	message	seems	to	me	to	be	more	about
controlling	 than	relating.	Her	screech	and	her	explanatory	questions	sound	like
attempts	to	make	Heather	feel	bad.	Her	questions	showed	us	nothing	about	Sara
or	her	feelings.	They	were	focused	entirely	on	what	Heather	should	have	done.
Here’s	what	Sara	might	have	said	if	her	intent	had	been	to	relate:	Sara	makes

eye	contact	with	her	daughter	and	says,	“Heather,	I	can	feel	the	heat	rising	in	my
face	 as	 I	 think	 about	 how	 I	 just	 polished	 this	 floor.	 I’m	 angry	 at	 you	 for	 not
wiping	 your	 feet.”	 Then	 she	 pauses	 and	 allows	 her	 message	 to	 sink	 in.	 She
doesn’t	lay	it	on	thicker	in	order	to	be	right	or	to	justify	her	feelings.	Speaking
her	 feelings	 this	way	allows	her	 to	 really	 feel	and	affirm	them,	 thus	 increasing
the	likelihood	of	her	getting	over	them.	Heather	might	still	look	sullen	and	walk
out;	she	might	feel	some	sympathy	for	her	mom;	or	she	might	simply	receive	the
information	as	feedback.	The	result	of	the	communication	is	not	what’s	at	issue
here.	The	 issue	 is	 Sara’s	 intent.	When	her	 intent	 is	 to	 relate,	 or	 to	 simply	 and
directly	 share	 her	 experience	with	 her	 daughter,	 she	 is	 focusing	 on	 something
within	 her	 control	 rather	 than	 trying	 to	 control	 things	 that	 are	 not	—	 like	 her
daughter’s	behavior.	Control-oriented	communication	tends	 to	backfire	on	you;



it	often	leads	to	the	exact	opposite	of	the	result	you	were	hoping	for.	It	also	leads
you	away	from	your	present	experience.
Here’s	 another	 example	 of	what	 happens	when	we	 control	 instead	of	 relate.

Jody,	Freya’s	supervisor,	found	herself	feeling	unsafe	in	a	very	familiar	way:	she
had	 just	 received	 a	 written	 report	 from	 Freya	 that	 was	 full	 of	 errors	 and
unsupported	 assumptions,	 but	 Jody	 was	 afraid	 to	 give	 Freya	 any	 critical
feedback.	She	could	just	imagine	Freya	going	over	her	head	and	complaining	to
her	 supervisor	 that	 Jody	 was	 insensitive.	 So	 instead	 of	 giving	 Freya	 any
feedback,	 Jody	 decided	 to	 simply	 rewrite	 the	 report	 herself.	 Of	 course,	 Jody
resented	Freya	for	her	sloppy	report	writing,	which	created	unfinished	business,
resulting	in	further	tension	between	them.
This	type	of	unfortunate	situation	is	not	unusual	in	the	workplace.	Jody’s	need

for	control	in	this	case	is	quite	understandable.	It	is	possible	that	she	could	get	in
trouble	with	her	boss	if	Freya	did	complain.	But	can	you	see	how	little	freedom
Jody	has?	By	placing	more	value	on	staying	out	of	trouble	than	on	speaking	her
mind,	 Jody	 keeps	 herself	 feeling	 at	 the	mercy	 of	 her	 environment.	 Perhaps	 if
Jody	 had	 been	 aware	 of	 the	 difference	 between	 relating	 and	 controlling,	 she
would	have	felt	empowered	to	approach	the	situation	differently.

By	placing	more	value	on	staying	cout	of	trouble	than	on
speaking	her	mind,	Jody	keeps	herself	feeling	at	the	mercy	of
her	environment.

Self-Assessment	Quiz

Here’s	another	quiz.	Give	yourself	a	1	to	5	rating	for	each	item	(with	1	being
usually	not	true	of	you	and	5	being	mostly	true).

1.	If	another	person	and	I	disagree	on	how	something	should	be	done,	I’m
usually	right.

2.	I	get	very	uncomfortable	when	I	don’t	know	what’s	expected	of	me.
3.	I’m	almost	always	in	the	teacher	role	as	opposed	to	the	learner	role.
4.	I	hate	feeling	awkward	and	unsure	of	myself,	and	I	avoid	situations	that
make	me	feel	this	way.

5.	If	someone	gives	me	negative	feedback	about	something	I	have	done,	I’m



not	likely	to	tell	this	person	how	the	feedback	affects	me.
6.	If	I’m	upset	by	the	behavior	of	someone	close	to	me,	I’m	not	likely	to
disclose	this.

If	you	got	several	3’s,	4’s,	or	5’s	on	 this	quiz,	your	need	for	control	may	be
higher	than	your	need	to	relate.

What’s	the	Difference

Relating	is	motivated	by	the	wish	to	know	and	be	known,	to	open	yourself	to
another	 so	 they	can	see	and	perhaps	empathize	with	your	experience.	Relating
encompasses	 truth	 skill	 #1,	 experiencing	 what	 is,	 and	 truth	 skill	 #2,	 being
transparent.	 Controlling	 comes	 from	 the	 need	 to	 be	 comfortable	 and	 safe,	 to
avoid	 feeling	 awkward,	 uncomfortable,	 or	 unsafe.	 Controlling	 uses	 all	 the
strategies	you’ve	learned	over	a	lifetime	to	make	yourself	feel	safe.

Controlling	comes	from	the	need	to	be	comfortable	and	safe,
to	avoid	feeling	awkward,	uncomfortable,	or	unsafe.>

Relating	means	revealing	what	is	going	on	with	you	now,	in	this	moment.	By
relating	as	a	regular	spiritual	awareness	practice,	you	will	learn	to	trust	that	you
do	not	need	to	control	how
other	people	react	to	you	or	whether	things	turn	out	as	planned.	Your	sense	of

self-worth	will	be	based	not	on	how	things	turn	out,	but	on	whether	you	express
what	you	think,	know,	and	feel	in	each	moment.
As	you	learn	to	relate	more	and	control	less,	what	you	express	will	be	based

on	 your	 own	 present-time	 experience,	 something	 no	 one	 can	 argue	 with,
something	 that	 only	 you	 are	 an	 authority	 on,	 so	 you	 need	 not	 be	 afraid	 of
disagreement.	Relating	 is	not	 about	 convincing	anyone	 that	you	are	 right;	 it	 is
about	 shared	 learning	 and	 mutual	 understanding.	 You	 are	 truly	 curious	 about
how	others	respond	to	you,	even	if	they	disagree.	All	news	is	good	news.	You’d
rather	hear	the	truth,	even	if	it’s	disappointing	or	uncomfortable.
The	 controlling	 mind	 prefers	 to	 have	 things	 be	 predictable	 and	 known.	 It

prefers	that	others	agree	with	you	or	conform	to	your	wishes.	It	supports	having
a	 definite	 stance	 or	 position	 so	 that	 your	 behavior	will	 appear	 consistent	with



your	 image.	 And	 it	 definitely	 prefers	 stability	 over	 change.	 Your	 controlling
mind	tries	to	create	a	certain	impression	or	to	ensure	a	certain	outcome.	It	likes
to	make	you	feel	like	you	already	know	things	that	you	actually	cannot	know	for
sure	—	like	how	things	should	turn	out,	what’s	best	for	another	person,	or	why
someone	did	what	they	did.	As	you’ll	recall,	in	the	story	about	my	dad	and	his
bosses	 in	chapter	1,	my	dad	preferred	 to	 think	he	knew	how	his	bosses	would
respond,	which	protected	him	from	taking	a	risk	and	actually	finding	out.

Get	Comfortable	with	Discomfort

Until	 recently,	 most	 people	 thought	 of	 their	 lives	 and	 their	 identities	 as
basically	stable,	punctuated	every	now	and	then	by	some	big	event	or	crisis	that
required	 them	 to	 change.	Now	 that	we	 are	 confronted	 every	 day	with	 the	 fact
that	we	 and	 everything	 around	us	 are	 in	 constant	 flux,	we	 are	 being	 forced	 to
revise	our	ideas	about	who	we	are	and	what	is	real.	We’re	beginning	to	suspect
that	we	are	really	not	in	control	of	very	much	that	goes	on	around	us.	And	some
of	us	are	noticing	that	we	no	longer	feel	as	sure	as	we	once	did	about	what	we
want	to	happen	or	what	we	think	should	happen.
If	our	 ideas	about	being	 in	control	are	 illusions,	where	does	 this	 leave	us?	 I

think	we	human	beings	need	to	become	more	comfortable	with	the	discomfort	of
not	knowing,	as	 in:	 I	 tell	you	what	 I’m	feeling	without	knowing	how	you	will
react.	We	 need	 to	 learn	 to	 tolerate	 that	 uncomfortable	 in-between	 part	 of	 any
interaction,	 that	 stage	 of	 not-	 knowing-that-which-cannot-	 yet-be-known	 (but
may	become	known	in	the	next	moment	if	you	can	stop	trying	to	control	things
and	 stay	 open).	 This	 practice	 becomes	 easier	 once	 you	 learn	 how	 to	 ground
yourself	in	the	present	moment	by	focusing	on	what	you	are	experiencing	right
now.	If	you	learn	to	do	this	as	a	regular	practice	—	paying	attention	to	what	you
notice	—	you	will	experience	a	profound	shift	in	your	identity,	in	who	you	think
you	are.	You	will	shift	from	seeing	yourself	as	someone	who	tries	to	get	certain
results	(and	is	often	frustrated	as	a	result)	to	someone	who	is	simply	aware	and
present,	noticing	what’s	going	on.

Relating	means	revealing	what	is	going	on	with	you	now,	in
this	moment.	By	relating	as	a	regular	spiritual	awareness
practice,	you	will	learn	to	trust	that	you	do	not	need	to	control
how	other	people	react	to	you	or	whether	things	turn	out	as



planned.	Your	sense	of	self-worth	will	be	based	not	on	how
things	turn	out,	but	on	whether	you	express	what	you	think,
know,	and	feel	in	each	moment.

Getting	 comfortable	 with	 discomfort	 means	 not	 resisting	 information,
feedback,	 ideas,	 or	 events	 that	 may	 be	 at	 odds	 with	 your	 expectations	 and
desires.	For	example,	 if	your	mate	 is	hinting	around	 that	he	or	 she	 is	unhappy
with	 your	 sex	 life,	 it	 behooves	 you	 to	 hear	 the	 “bad	 news,”	 honest	 and
uncensored.	 If	 you	 are	 working	 long	 hours	 and	 notice	 that	 you’re	 tired	 and
grumpy	most	of	 the	 time,	you	can	 feel	and	express	your	discomfort	 (relate)	or
you	 can	 override	 your	 feelings	 (control)	 because	 you	 fear	 that	 feeling	 and
expressing	your	feelings	might	upset	someone	or	force	you	to	recognize	the	need
for	a	lifestyle	change.
One	of	the	best	things	about	feeling	discomfort	is	that	it	signals,	before	things

get	really	bad,	that	something	needs	to	change.	If	you	prefer	to	be	in	denial	about
your	pain,	you	won’t	heed	the	early	warning	signals	of	an	impending	crisis	(as	in
“I	want	a	divorce”	or	“You’re	fired”).	In	my	study	on	new	human	capacities,	I
found	that	people	with	the	ability	to	notice	when	“something	isn’t	right”	and	to
make	the	necessary	changes	before	things	get	even	worse	are	the	ones	who	are
thriving	 in	 this	 world	 of	 tumultuous	 change.	 (See	 my	 book	 From	 Chaos	 to
Confidence:	 Survival	 Strategies	 for	 the	New	Workplace	 [New	York:	 Simon	&
Schuster,	 1995]).	They	participate	with	 the	 change	process,	much	 like	 a	 surfer
riding	 a	wave,	 responding	 to	 inner	 and	 outer	 cues	moment	 by	moment	 rather
than	waiting	for	a	major	crisis	to	call	them	into	action.	To	thrive	in	this	sped-up
world,	 people	 now	 need	 to	 become	 continually	 responsive	 rather	 than
occasionally	reactive.

Your	Comfort	or	Your	Life?

You	have	probably	done	your	share	of	controlling	—	we	all	have.	But	where
has	it	gotten	you?	Do	you	really	trust	yourself?	How	relaxed	are	you	in	the	face
of	uncertainty?	Are	you	confident	that	you	can	handle	whatever	life	deals	you?
Is	the	feedback	you	get	from	life	really	about	you?	Wouldn’t	you	like	to	know,
before	your	 time	on	earth	 is	up,	how	 the	world	 responds	 to	your	unique	 ideas,
feelings,	foibles,	and	gifts?	Or	are	you	content	just	to	give	a	good	performance
of	the	script	you	were	given	by	society	or	your	family?



Most	 of	 us	 think	we	would	 have	 too	much	 to	 lose	 if	 we	were	 to	 let	 go	 of
controlling	things	and	let	ourselves	be	seen	as	we	really	are.	“There’s	too	much
at	stake.”	That’s	something	I	hear	a	lot	of	people	say.	To	help	you	take	a	look	at
what	you	think	you	might	lose,	here	are	some	typical	responses	from	people	I’ve
worked	with:	“I	might	 lose	my	marriage.”	Does	your	mate	require	 that	you	 lie
about	who	you	are	so	that	you	can	stay	married?	“I	might	lose	people’s	respect.”
Who	do	you	have	to	pretend	to	be	to	feel	lovable	or	respectable?	“I	might	lose
money.”	Is	money	more	valuable	to	you	than	honesty?

When	we	are	fully	expressing	our	one-of-a-kind	selves,	we
also	feel	more	kinship	with	all	the	other	one-of-a-kind	selves
in	the	world.

When	I	explore	objections	such	as	these	with	my	clients,	seminar	participants,
colleagues,	and	friends,	we	discover	that	we’re	all	in	this	together.	We	live	in	a
culture	that	does	not	support	relating.	We	have	been	conditioned	to	measure	our
worth	by	how	much	people	like	us,	how	much	we	get	done,	or	how	much	power
and	control	we	have.	At	some	level	of	our	being,	we	hate	the	predicament	we’re
in.	We	 long	 for	 the	 feeling	 that	 we	 are	 okay	 just	 as	 we	 are.	We	 long	 to	 feel
relaxed.	We	long	for	the	courage	to	live	with	integrity.	We	long	to	reconnect	with
our	 authentic	 self	—	 that	 sense	of	 uniqueness	 and	originality	 that	 comes	 from
deep	inside	and	is	independent	of	others’	expectations.
When	we	have	 the	 courage	 to	 show	up	 as	we	 are,	we	discover	 that	we	 feel

more	deeply	connected	to	others.	It’s	paradoxical.	When	we	are	fully	expressing
our	one-of-a-kind	selves,	we	also	feel	more	kinship	with	all	the	other	one-of-a-
kind	 selves	 in	 the	world.	Why?	Because	when	we	are	 fully	 self-expressed,	we
become	 free	 of	 unfinished	 business	 and	 are	 able	 to	 be	 fully	 present	 to	 others.
Self-expression	leads	to	feeling	open,	available,	trusting,	and	relaxed;	all	things
that	lead	to	feeling	connected	to	others.

The	Right,	Safe,	and	Certain	Game

Most	 people	 I	 meet	 are	 still	 playing	 the	 right,	 safe,	 and	 certain	 (that	 is,
controlling)	game.	The	rules	of	this	game	are:	project	a	positive	image;	don’t	be
too	different	from	the	norm;	deny	or	cover	up	any	doubts	about	yourself	or	what



you	 are	 doing;	 don’t	 rock	 the	 boat,	 especially	 if	 this	 could	 lead	 to	 conflict	 or
disapproval;	act	like	you	know,	even	if	you	don’t;	and	don’t	show	vulnerability.
Since	we	all	seem	to	be	so	caught	up	in	playing	this	game,	how	do	we	create	a

new	social	context	that	supports	being	real,	unique,	and	open	to	surprise	(that	is,
relating)?	Where	did	we	learn	that	it’s	not	safe	to	say	what	we	feel	without	trying
to	predict	or	control	the	outcome?	Most	of	us	came	to	this	conclusion	when	we
were	 children.	 We	 lived	 in	 a	 world	 controlled	 by	 big	 people	 on	 whom	 we
depended	 for	 our	 very	 lives.	We	were	 small	 and	 helpless.	 They	were	 big	 and
powerful.	 If	 we	 offended	 them	 too	much,	 they	might	 leave.	We’d	 be	 without
support	and	nurturance.	We’d	probably	die.	That	was	then.

Now	we	are	big	and	self-supporting,	not	small	and	dependent.
We	will	not	die	if	someone	rejects	or	abandons	us.	But	much
of	the	time	we	lose	sight	of	that	fact	—	at	least	when	issues	of
disapproval,	rejection,	or	emotional	abandonment	are
concerned.

This	 is	 now.	Now	we	 are	 big	 and	 self-supporting,	 not	 small	 and	 dependent.
We	will	not	die	if	someone	rejects	or	abandons	us.	But	much	of	the	time	we	lose
sight	of	that	fact	—	at	least	when	issues	of	disapproval,	rejection,	or	emotional
abandonment	are	concerned.	It	does	not	serve	us	in	any	way	to	see	ourselves	as
dependent	on	others	for	our	sense	of	worthiness.	I	think	it’s	time	to	stop	acting	as
if	we’re	kids	dependent	on	the	adults	around	us.
It’s	time	to	stop	acting	mortally	wounded	when	someone	says	he	doesn’t	like

something	we	did.	 It’s	 time	to	give	one	another	credit	 for	being	able	 to	handle
honest	feedback.	Let’s	not	base	our	self-	esteem	on	being	able	to	control	people
and	events.	As	I’ve	stated,	this	type	of	control	is	an	illusion,	anyway.	Let’s	put
more	 value	 on	 seeing	 what	 is	 than	 on	 being	 comfortable.	 Let’s	 get	 more
comfortable	with	discomfort.	We’re	big	now.
If	 you	 decide	 to	 let	 go	 of	 controlling	what	 others	 think	 of	 you,	 you’ll	 need

other	 people	 to	 participate	 in	 this	work	with	 you.	One	person	 can’t	 do	 it	 very
well	alone.	We	need	one	another	if	we	are	going	to	change	the	rules	of	the	game
from	 right,	 safe,	 and	 certain	 to	 real,	 unique,	 and	 open	 to	 surprise.	 A	 strong
movement	toward	being	more	authentic	already	exists	in	our	culture.	More	and
more	people	are	waking	up	to	the	fact	that	right,	safe,	and	certain	doesn’t	work
like	 it	 once	 did.	 We’re	 learning	 that	 basing	 our	 self-esteem	 on	 the	 ability	 to



control	external	events	actually	keeps	us	feeling	out	of	control.

Let’s	put	more	value	on	seeing	what	is	than	on	being
comfortable.

In	the	study	I	referred	to	earlier,	I	found	that	the	people	we	find	most	credible
and	 trustworthy	 are	 those	who	 are	 open	 to	 our	 response	 (which	 is	 not	 in	 their
control).	 I	 also	 found	 that	 people	 who	 are	 thriving	 in	 this	 fast-paced,
information-overloaded	 world	 are	 those	 who	 are	 able	 to	 trust	 themselves	 in
situations	 of	 high	 ambiguity	 and	 uncertainty.	 This	 is	 what	 an	 environment	 of
constant	change	requires	of	us.	It	requires	that	we	participate	with	the	process	of
change	rather	than	trying	to	manage	or	control	it.

Basing	our	self-esteem	on	the	ability	to	control	external	events
actually	keeps	us	feeling	out	of	control.

Putting	yourself	in	Flo’s	position,	what	would	you	do?	Would	you	say	what’s
on	your	mind	(relate)	or	 let	him	make	 the	next	move	(control)?	 In	controlling,
she’d	 be	 more	 strategic;	 she’d	 wait	 to	 see	 if	 he	 was	 interested	 in	 her	 before
revealing	her	own	interest.	In	relating,	her	aim	would	be	to	know	and	be	known
—	 to	 let	 him	 know	 her	 feelings	 and	 see	 how	 he	 responds,	 without	 trying	 to
manipulate	the	outcome	and	without	trying	to	protect	herself	from	being	rejected
or	to	protect	him	from	having	to	do	the	rejecting.
Flo	decided	to	take	a	chance.	She	joined	Ron	and	the	woman	in
Everyone	 I	 know	 grew	 up	 in	 an	 environment	 that	 favored	 controlling	 over

relating.	Control	 is	still	 the	prevailing	cultural	paradigm.	It	 is	 the	basis	for	 this
culture’s	dominant	 institutions:	government,	business,	education,	religion,	child
rearing,	marriage...	even	dating!	All	these	institutions	are	founded	on	controlling
feelings	and	impulses	in	the	interests	of	being	right,	safe,	and	certain.	Control	is
not	bad	in	itself.	It’s	just	that	we	have	become	compulsive	about	it.	We	operate
from	the	intent	to	control	when	we	actually	don’t	need	to	know	the	outcome	or
when	embracing	an	element	of	risk	would	make	us	feel	more	creative,	juicy,	and
alive.



Noticing	Your	Intent	in	Dating

Flo	and	Ron	had	just	met	at	a	singles	party	sponsored	by	their	condo	owners’
association.	As	they	were	standing	in	line	for	drinks	and	talking,	Flo	decided	to
take	 a	 risk	 and	 tell	Ron	 she	was	 attracted	 to	 him.	 Just	 then,	 before	 she	 had	 a
chance	to	say	anything,	Ron	excused	himself	saying	he	had	to	go	to	 the	men’s
room.	He	added,	looking	into	her	eyes,	that	he	was	enjoying	talking	to	her	and
looked	forward	to	continuing	the	conversation.	Flo	stayed	in	line	and	got	herself
a	 drink.	 A	 few	minutes	 later,	 she	 noticed	 Ron	 on	 the	 other	 side	 of	 the	 room,
talking	 to	 a	 very	 attractive	woman,	 looking	 like	he	was	 enjoying	himself.	 She
debated	what	to	do:	should	she	join	them?	Should	she	wait	until	he’s	alone	and
then	resume	the	conversation?	Or	should	she	play	it	safe	and	just	wait	and	see	if
he	approaches	her?
Putting	yourself	in	Flo’s	position,	what	would	you	do?	Would	you	say	what’s

on	your	mind	(relate)	or	 let	him	make	 the	next	move	(control)?	 In	controlling,
she’d	 be	 more	 strategic;	 she’d	 wait	 to	 see	 if	 he	 was	 interested	 in	 her	 before
revealing	her	own	interest.	In	relating,	her	aim	would	be	to	know	and	be	known
—	 to	 let	 him	 know	 her	 feelings	 and	 see	 how	 he	 responds,	 without	 trying	 to
manipulate	the	outcome	and	without	trying	to	protect	herself	from	being	rejected
or	to	protect	him	from	having	to	do	the	rejecting.
Flo	decided	to	take	a	chance.	She	joined	Ron	and	the	woman	in	conversation,

and	when	 there	was	 a	 pause,	 she	 told	Ron	 that	 before	 he	 had	 gone	 off	 to	 the
men’s	room,	she’d	been	about	to	tell	him	something,	which	she’d	still	like	to	do
when	 the	 time	 was	 right	 for	 him	 to	 resume	 their	 conversation.	 She	 stayed	 in
conversation	with	Ron	and	the	woman,	and	soon	the	other	woman	left	 to	get	a
drink.	Ron	 told	her	 he	was	glad	 she	had	 come	over	 and	 really	wanted	 to	hear
what	she	had	to	say.	She	told	him	of	her	attraction;	he	loved	hearing	it;	and	they
went	home	together	that	night.

This	is	what	an	environment	of	constant	change	requires	of
us.	It	requires	that	we	participate	with	the	process	of	change
rather	than	trying	to	manage	or	control	it.

When	 you	 let	 someone	 know	you	 find	 him	 attractive,	 you	 don’t	 need	 to	 be
sure	 that	 he	 is	 going	 to	 respond	 in	kind.	 If	 you	 treat	 yourself	 as	 too	 fragile	 to



handle	unintended	outcomes,	 then	you	don’t	develop	 the	 resilience	 that	human
beings	 need	 to	 cope	with	 a	world	 full	 of	 unpredictability	 and	 change.	 On	 the
other	 hand,	 if	 you	 take	 a	 risk,	 you	 may	 learn	 that	 you	 cope	 rather	 well	 with
uncertainty.	And	sometimes,	you’ll	get	lucky	like	Flo	did!

Relating	in	Friendship

Relating	is	a	communication	between	you	and	another	person	that	is	focused
on	 your	 experience	 of	 the	 present	 moment.	 You	 notice	 your	 feelings	 and
thoughts	 and	 the	 sensations	 in	 your	 body,	 and	 you	 report	 them	 simply	 and
directly.	 Then	 you	 see,	 hear,	 or	 notice	 the	 person’s	 response.	 Let’s	 say	 you’re
angry	 at	 a	 friend	 about	 something	 she	 did.	 We’ll	 call	 this	 feeling	 your
“foreground.”	It	is	front	and	center	in	your	awareness,	and	until	it	is	expressed,
your	 attention	 will	 be	 drawn	 to	 it.	 You’ll	 have	 unfinished	 business	 with	 your
friend.
Relating	would	go	something	like	this:	“I’m	angry	at	you	for	getting	here	an

hour	 later	 than	we	agreed.	 I’m	 imagining	maybe	you	didn’t	 really	want	 to	get
together	 tonight.”	 Then	 you	wait	 for	 her	 to	 respond.	As	 you	wait,	 you	 notice
your	 bodily	 sensations	 and	 discover	 that	 you	 no	 longer	 feel	 angry.	 You	 feel
calmer	and	more	available	to	whatever	she	has	to	say.	Now,	what	if	your	friend
gets	defensive	and	tells	you,	“You	shouldn’t	get	upset	over	such	a	small	thing”?
You	 might	 notice	 your	 body	 contracting	 and	 your	 jaw	 tightening	 as	 you
recognize	a	resurgence	of	anger.	You	could	choose	to	keep	on	relating:	“I	resent
you	for	saying	that	I	shouldn’t	get	upset	.	.	.	I	imagine	I’m	‘shoulding’	on	myself,
and	I’m	noticing	that	after	I	told	you	I	was	angry,	I	didn’t	feel	as	angry.	Maybe
I’m	over	it.	Once	again,	expressing	it	seemed	to	clear	it.”

After	you	express	it,	whatever	you	were	feeling	recedes	into
the	background	of	your	awareness.	You	feel	lighter,	more
open.	Your	energy	is	flowing	again.

Then	you	wait,	 and	 she	 says:	 “Okay.	 I’ll	 try	an	 I	message	 instead	of	a	you-
should	message:	I	resent	you	for	saying	you	were	angry	at	me,	and	I	appreciate
you	for	telling	me	you	were	‘shoulding’	on	yourself.	Hm,	yeah,	I	don’t	feel	the
resentment	so	much	now,	and	the	appreciation	feels	more	real.”



This	example	demonstrates	how	relating	allows	a	natural	moment-to-moment
change	process	to	unfold:	You	feel	something;	you	express	it.	Then	you	find	that
your	 feeling	 has	 changed.	 After	 you	 express	 it,	 whatever	 you	 were	 feeling
recedes	 into	 the	 background	 of	 your	 awareness.	 You	 feel	 lighter,	 more	 open.
Your	 energy	 is	 flowing	 again.	You	 got	 a	 sense	 of	 closure	 or	 completion	 from
expressing	yourself.	And	you	feel	closer	to	your	friend	as	a	result.

Benefits	of	Relating	over	Controlling

Relating	 is	 like	 dancing.	 It	 is	 spacious	 enough	 to	 include	 both	 partners’
experiences	and	desires.	It	encourages	people	 to	sense	their	connection	to	each
other,	to	exchange	all	the	truth,	information,	or	energy	available	in	the	moment.
It	is	a	vital	skill	for	these	fast-	changing	times,	because	it	increases	your	capacity
for	dealing	with	situations	that	are	paradoxical,	ambiguous,	or	confusing.
Relating	 helps	 you	 develop	 a	 very	 sensitive,	 even	 telepathic	 resonance	with

your	surroundings.	This	opens	up	your	intuition	—	a	resource	that	is	likely	to	be
very	helpful	as	the	information	explosion	continues	to	boggle	and	confound	the
logical	mind.	Relating	begins	from	an	attitude	of	not	knowing	and	stays	open	to
perceiving	 changes	 and	 new	 possibilities	 as	 they	 unfold.	 Being	 present	 and
telling	the	truth	are	its	tools.
In	 contrast,	 controlling	 is	 an	 attempt	 to	maintain	 the	 illusion	 that	 you	know

how	things	should	be	and	can	make	things	happen	as	you	want	them	to.	Many
spiritual	 teachers	 have	 observed	 that	 most	 people	 have	 not	 resolved	 enough
unfinished	business	 from	 the	 past	 to	 know	what	 is	 good	 for	 them	most	 of	 the
time.	Most	people	are	so	caught	up	in	their	self-image	and	in	their	image	of	how
things	 should	 be	 that	 they	 are	 not	 able	 to	 be	 objective.	 They	 do	 not	 know
themselves	very	well	—	even	those	who	have	done	years	of	work	on	themselves.
So	 when	 you	 think	 you’re	 right	 or	 you	 know	 how	 things	 should	 be,	 your
“knowing”	may	 be	 based	 on	 a	 very	 limited,	 biased	 view	 of	 reality.	 It	 is	most
likely	based	on	an	agenda	to	stay	comfortable,	safe,	or	in	control.

There	may	be	times	when	honest	self-revelation	would	be
truly	dangerous	to	your	well-being,	but	more	often	than	not,
most	people	assume	danger	where	none	exists.



When	you	take	the	controlling	stance,	you	attempt	to	give	yourself	and	others
the	 impression	 that	 you	 are	 on	 top	 of	 the	 situation.	 If	 you	 feel	 anything	 like
vulnerability,	uncertainty,	or	anxiety,	your	controlling	mind	cautions	you	not	 to
reveal	 it.	Of	 course,	 there	may	be	 times	when	honest	 self-revelation	would	be
truly	dangerous	to	your	well-being,	but	more	often	than	not,	most	people	assume
danger	where	 none	 exists.	When	 you	 communicate	with	 the	 intent	 to	 control,
you	may	end	up	screening	out	potentially	vital	 information	or	overriding	other
people’s	input	if	it	doesn’t	support	your	agenda.

Some	Pitfalls	of	Controlling

Controlling	 inhibits	 you	 from	 clearing	 difficult	 feelings	 as	 they	 occur.	 This
keeps	 you	 distracted	 and	 unable	 to	 perceive	 your	 environment	 accurately.	 For
example,	let’s	imagine	you	are	upset	because	someone	didn’t	acknowledge	your
opinion.	But	 because	 you	hold	 a	 belief	 that	 it	 is	 not	 appropriate	 to	 show	your
emotions,	 you	 try	 to	 control	 yourself	 and	 push	 your	 upset	 feelings	 into	 the
background.	Perhaps	you	cover	your	feelings	with	a	smile,	but	your	smile	comes
across	as	 inauthentic	or	 forced;	and	because	you	did	not	express	your	upset,	 it
will	still	be	lurking	at	the	edges	of	your	awareness.	This	being	the	case,	it	may
be	difficult	 for	you	 to	 listen	or	 to	 stay	present	 to	what	 is	going	on	—	because
your	 unfinished	 business,	 that	 is,	 your	 unexpressed	 upset,	 is	 distracting	 you.
Your	unexpressed	 feelings	end	up	 interfering	with	your	ability	 to	perceive	and
describe	current	reality,	creating	unconscious	static	in	your	communications	with
others.
One	example	of	this	unconscious	static	is	when,	in	an	effort	to	control,	we	try

to	 manipulate	 the	 outcome	 of	 a	 situation	 or	 conversation:	 Teresa	 tells	 her
husband	Terry,	“You	refuse	to	hear	that	I	want	you	to	get	rid	of	that	dog	now!	I
don’t	 know	why	we’re	 together	 if	 you	 don’t	 care	 about	my	 needs.”	Terry	 can
sense	 that	 his	 wife	 is	 more	 interested	 in	 getting	 what	 she	 wants	 (or	 proving
herself	right)	than	in	hearing	his	authentic	response,	so	he	starts	to	feel	less	free,
honest,	 and	 spontaneous	 around	 her.	 He	 says	 something	 to	 appease	 her:	 “Oh,
honey,	I’m	doing	the	best	I	can.”	But	in	reality,	from	that	point	on,	he	becomes
less	open	around	her.	He	also	starts	withholding	important	information	from	her,
such	as	his	irritation	about	some	of	the	little	things	she	does.	As	a	result,	a	wall
of	silence	begins	to	grow	between	them.



When	you	communicate	with	the	intent	to	control,	you	may
end	up	screening	out	potentially	vital	information	or
overriding	other	people’s	input	if	it	doesn’t	support	your
agenda.

Relating	Builds	Connection	and	Trust

Communicating	with	the	intent	to	relate	builds	a	sense	of	trust	and	connection.
When	I	show	you	how	your	actions	have	affected	me	without	implying	that	you
should	change,	then	you	will	feel	more	connected	to	me	and	will	be	more	likely
to	want	to	help	me.	If	I	reveal	to	you,	“I	felt	so	disappointed	that	you	missed	my
birthday	party,”	you	are	more	 likely	 to	 feel	empathy	with	me	 than	 if	 I	 just	 tell
you	what	to	do,	as	in	“Don’t	ever	promise	things	you	can’t	deliver!”	Hearing	a
statement	like	that,	you	don’t	get	a	feel	for	me.	There’s	no	presence,	no	shared
vibration.	 I’m	 telling	 you	 what	 to	 do	 to	 protect	 me	 from	 experiencing	 hurt
feelings	instead	of	giving	you	a	look	inside	me.
When	I	open	my	heart	and	mind	to	you,	I	am	trusting	the	unknown.	In	a	sense,

I	am	entering	the	unknown	with	you	and	inviting	you	to	meet	me	there.	This	leap
of	faith	tends	to	create	a	greater	sense	of	connection	because	I	have	just	risked
something	on	behalf	of	our	relationship.
As	you	get	better	at	 relating,	you	start	 to	 live	 in	an	undefended,	unprotected

state	more	of	the	time.	You	become	more	open	and	free	from	worry.	You	learn	to
live	without	 your	 habitual	ways	of	 protecting	yourself	 from	 the	 anxiety	of	 the
unknown.	 You	 accept	 that	 you	 cannot	 and	 do	 not	 need	 to	 control	 how	 other
people	 react	 to	you.	You	 learn	 to	prefer	 hearing	 an	honest	 response	 instead	of
what	you’re	comfortable	with.	In	doing	so,	you	come	to	trust	that	you’ll	be	able
to	handle	another’s	honesty.
Self-trust	 in	facing	the	unknown	is	one	of	the	new	capacities	that	we	human

beings	need	to	develop	as	we	enter	an	era	of	accelerating	change	and	increasing
uncertainty.	 Relating	 gives	 you	 practice	 handling	 uncertainty	 and
unpredictability.	It	leads	to	the	confidence	that	no	matter	what	unexpected	events
come	your	way,	you	will	be	able	to	respond	creatively.

Self-trust	in	facing	the	unknown	is	one	of	the	new	capacities



that	we	human	beings	need	to	develop	as	we	enter	an	era	of
accelerating	change	and	increasing	uncertainty.

Control,	 on	 the	 contrary,	 arises	 from	 a	 ground	 of	 mistrust	 —	 mistrust	 of
yourself	 and	 of	 others.	 You	 do	 not	 disclose	 truths	 that	 might	 put	 you	 in	 a
vulnerable	position	until	you	are	fairly	sure	you	know	what	the	other’s	reaction
will	be.	You	don’t	trust	yourself	to	be	able	to	handle	an	unwanted	surprise:	“I’ll
wait	until	 I’m	sure	he	 really	 likes	me	before	 I	 tell	him	how	much	 I	 like	him.”
When	 you	 act	 like	 you	 can’t	 handle	 the	 unexpected,	 your	 ability	 to	 do	 so
dwindles.	You	also	 lose	 that	zest	or	 spark	 that	comes	 from	 taking	 risks.	When
you	communicate	strategically,	you	are	controlling:	“If	I	do	this,	people	will	like
me	or	buy	what	I’m	selling”	or	“If	I	do	this	for	her,	she’ll	feel	obliged	to	do	that
for	me.”	Such	strategizing	reinforces	the	idea	that	you	have	to	manipulate	other
people	 into	 liking	you	or	wanting	 to	help	you	and	 that	you	can’t	 trust	yourself
enough	to	simply	wait	and	see	how	others	will	respond	to	you	on	their	own.

Control	Patterns

I	 use	 the	 term	 control	 patterns	 to	 refer	 to	 the	 variety	 of	 unconscious	 ego-
protective	strategies	people	use	when	they	feel	unsafe,	that	is,	when	they	do	not
have	 sufficient	 self-trust	 to	 face	 the	 unknown	 naked	 and	 undefended.	 I	 think
most	 people	 feel	 the	 need	 for	 protection	 a	 great	 deal	 of	 the	 time,	 and	most	 of
what	we	do	and	say	comes	not	from	a	sense	of	freedom	but	from	a	conditioned
control	pattern.	I	have	identified	six	types	of	control	patterns:
1.	 Identifying	with	your	story	or	script.	Eric	Berne,	author	of	Games	People

Play,	 popularized	 the	 notion	 that	 significant	 elements	 of	 our	 childhood	 stories
get	played	out	repeatedly	in	our	adult	life	because	of	our	scripts.	In	my	family,	I
was	the	big	sister.	This	script	generated	a	story	line	in	which	I	portray	myself	as
competent,	 knowledgeable,	 in	 charge:	 a	mentor	 and	 leader.	 If	 feelings	 of	 fear,
dependency,	 or	 inadequacy	 arise,	 I	 tend	 not	 to	 notice	 them.	Other	 people	may
notice	 that	 I	 seem	 to	 be	 fearful	 or	 shaky,	 but	 I	 can	 sail	 along	 through	 life
completely	unconscious	of	these	underlying	feelings.
Different	 automatic	 behavior	 patterns	 tend	 to	 accompany	 each	 childhood

script.	Take	a	look	at	your	own	life	story.	Were	you	the	smart	one	or	the	pretty
one?	 Were	 you	 teacher’s	 pet	 or	 a	 troublemaker?	 Did	 you	 draw	 attention	 to
yourself	or	try	to	remain	invisible?



2.	 Filtering	 your	 perceptions	 through	 strongly	 held	 beliefs.	 Also	 based	 on
early	 life	 experiences,	 your	 core	 beliefs	 act	 as	 a	 filter	 or	 set	 of	 lenses	 through
which	 you	 view	 the	world.	 The	most	 basic	 question	 related	 to	 core	 beliefs	 is
Einstein’s	famous	phrase,	“Is	the	Universe	friendly?”	Applying	this	question	to
your	early	learning	experiences,	did	you	feel	welcomed	by	the	world	when	you
were	born,	or	did	you	have	to	struggle	right	from	the	start?	How	supportive	was
your	 environment?	 Your	 answer	 to	 these	 questions	 tends	 to	 shape	 what	 you
expect	from	life	and	what	you	get.

When	you	act	like	you	can’t	handle	the	unexpected,	your
ability	to	do	so	dwindles.

Pause	now	and	ask	yourself:	On	a	scale	from	1	to	10,	how	friendly	do	I	feel
the	 universe	 is	 toward	me?	Without	 thinking,	 just	 let	 a	 number	 come	 to	 you.
When	I	did	this	exercise,	I	gave	myself	an	“8.”	In	the	story	of	my	personality,	I
had	parents	who	were	very	attentive,	loving,	validating,	and	supportive	—	with
one	 exception:	 if	 you	were	 sick,	 they	 pretty	much	 expected	 you	 to	 ride	 it	 out
until	you	got	over	it.	There	were	no	extra	benefits	for	being	incapacitated.	As	an
adult,	I	rarely	get	sick.	If	I	do	get	sick,	I	don’t	expect	sympathy	or	help.	I	pretty
much	expect	 to	take	care	of	myself.	So	I	see	the	universe	as	basically	friendly,
but	not	very	sympathetic	toward	weakness.
Like	my	script,	my	belief	that	I’m	basically	on	my	own	colors	how	I	relate	to

weakness,	dependency,	and	helplessness	in	myself	and	others.	I	may	mistakenly
assume	that	someone	is	doing	fine	when	they	are	really	crying	out	for	help.	My
core	belief	structure	creates	a	blind	spot.	As	you	look	at	your	story	and	compare
it	 to	mine,	what	 critical	 incidents	 or	 traumatic	 events	 occurred	 that	may	 have
given	you	the	idea	that	“it’s	not	safe	to___	(be	sick,	be	honest,	be	joyful,	express
your	sexuality,	attract	attention	to	yourself,	 talk	back,	or	assert	yourself)?	Most
core	beliefs	can	be	traced	back	to	the	need	to	feel	safe.
3.	Getting	your	buttons	pushed.	When	you	have	a	knee-jerk	negative	reaction

to	 something	 someone	 else	 does	 or	 says,	 this	 indicates	 that	 you	 have	 a
hypersensitive	 spot	 on	 your	 ego,	 metaphorically	 called	 a	 button.	 Buttons	 are
usually	related	to	a	repeated	insult	suffered	in	childhood.	Thus,	if	your	mother	or
father	continually	nagged	you	to	do	your	homework	or	chores,	you	may	have	a
button	about	being	told	what	to	do	as	an	adult.	Or	if	they	were	very	critical	and
found	 fault	 with	 the	 things	 you	 did,	 you	 may	 have	 a	 button	 about	 being



criticized.	 Using	 this	 example,	 if	 you	 do	 have	 a	 hyper-	 sensitivity	 to	 others’
criticizing	 you,	 you	will	 tend	 to	 hear	 criticism	 even	when	 it	 is	 not	 the	 other’s
intent.
It	is	important	to	know	what	your	buttons	are,	because	they	help	you	take	your

negative	 reactions	 less	 seriously.	Most	 people’s	 buttons	 are	 connected	 to	 their
“favorite	 fear,”	as	discussed	 in	chapter	3.	The	most	common	favorite	 fears	are
the	fear	of	criticism	(so	you	are	vigilant	for	any	signs	of	disapproval	or	criticism
in	your	environment);	the	fear	of	abandonment	(so	you	notice	the	smallest	cues
that	 signal	 you	 are	 about	 to	 be	 left;	 you	 may	 even	 develop	 a	 pattern	 of
abandoning	the	other	first,	as	soon	as	you	sense	that	he	or	she	is	moving	away);
the	fear	of	being	controlled	(so	any	time	anyone	tells	you	to	do	something,	you
instinctively	resist	—	even	if	your	mind	tries	to	override	this	reaction,	something
in	 you	will	 drag	 its	 heels);	 the	 fear	 of	 being	 ignored	 (so	 if	 you	 don’t	 get	 the
attention	 you	 expect,	 you	 go	 into	 a	 characteristic	 reaction,	 like	 overtalking,
pouting,	or	some	other	way	of	demanding	attention	without	taking	responsibility
for	what	you’re	doing);	the	fear	of	rejection	(so	if	another	won’t	give	you	what
you	want,	 you	 take	 it	 personally;	 you	 assume	 his	 actions	 are	against	 you;	 it’s
hard	to	imagine	that	they	could	be	simply	for	him).
Your	favorite	fear	promotes	an	unconscious	stance	that	braces	you	to	survive

the	feared	occurrence.	Thus	braced,	you	become	hypersensitive	to	cues	that	the
feared	event	may	be	about	 to	happen.	This	control	pattern	makes	 it	 impossible
for	you	to	accurately	perceive	what	is.
4.	Gesturing	 automatically.	 Some	 people	 have	 a	 patterned	 way	 of	 holding

their	face,	their	head,	or	their	body.	They	may	have	a	pastedon	smile	or	a	pasted-
on	 frown,	 regardless	 of	 their	 inner	 feeling,	 state,	 or	 mood.	 Such	 gestures	 are
control	patterns	if	they	represent	your	way	of	trying	to	remain	safe	or	in	control.
A	perpetual	smile,	for	example,	may	be	saying,	“please	like	me”	or	“please	don’t
hurt	me.”	A	robotic	nodding	gesture	might	be	your	way	of	giving	the	impression
that	you	are	listening,	when	in	reality	you	are	wrapped	up	in	your	own	thoughts.

Your	favorite	fear	promotes	an	unconscious	stance	that	braces
you	to	survive	the	feared	occurrence.

5.	Speaking	in	a	patterned	way.	If	you	have	a	characteristic	way	of	speaking
or	 using	 your	 voice,	 it	 may	 be	 an	 unconscious	 way	 to	 avoid	 some	 feared
outcome	or	to	assure	some	desired	result.	A	rapid,	staccato	way	of	speaking,	for



example,	 can	 signal	 that	 you	 are	 trying	 to	 hurry	 up	 and	 say	 something	 before
someone	 interrupts	 or	 stops	 paying	 attention.	 Some	 people	 who	manifest	 this
pattern	 were	 not	 listened	 to	 as	 children.	 Someone	 in	 their	 early	 world	 was
impatient	or	had	difficulty	paying	attention	to	them.	The	pacing	of	your	speech
and	the	way	you	use	silences	between	the	words	may	be	your	method	of	making
sure	that	never	happens	to	you	again.
You	 have	 probably	 known	 people	 who	 preface	 their	 comments	 with	 self-

deprecating	 remarks	 like,	 “I’m	 probably	 being	 naive,	 but”	 or	 “don’t	 mean	 to
sound	arrogant	but...”	These	remarks	can	be	a	way	of	protecting	yourself	 from
others’	 criticism	 by	 criticizing	 yourself	 first.	 And	 there	 are	 other	 ways	 this
pattern	manifests.	Many	years	ago	I	had	a	colleague	who	was	very	demanding	of
attention	and	had	a	hard	time	sharing	the	stage.	His	control	pattern	was	to	speak
very,	very	slowly.	It	was	as	if	he	was	forcing	you	to	pay	attention	to	him	while
he	 took	 his	 time	 getting	 to	 his	 point.	 Listening	 to	 him	 always	 brought	 up	 the
image	that	my	feet	were	nailed	to	the	floor	so	I	couldn’t	get	away!	Oft-repeated
phrases	 can	 also	 be	 control	 patterns.	 I	 know	 a	 woman	 who,	 whenever	 she’s
talking	to	her	husband	about	something	she	wants	his	agreement	on,	will	end	her
sentences	with,	“don’t	you	think?”	This	phrase	signals	that	he’d	better	agree	with
her	or	he’s	in	trouble.

Some	people	have	a	constant	inner	battle	going	on	between
the	inner	voice	that	wants	to	do	what	it	wants	and	the	voice
that	keeps	telling	them	what	they	“should”	be	doing.

6.	Replaying	the	same	self-talk	over	and	over.	Your	state	of	mind	is	revealed
by	 what	 you	 say	 as	 you	 talk	 to	 yourself.	 Some	 people	 have	 a	 constant	 inner
battle	going	on	between	the	inner	voice	that	wants	 to	do	what	 it	wants	and	the
voice	 that	 keeps	 telling	 them	what	 they	 “should”	 be	 doing.	 Some	 continually
replay	worries	 about	 the	 future.	Others	 focus	much	 of	 their	mental	 energy	 on
what	other	people	(for	example,	their	significant	other)	should	be	doing	as	a	way
of	avoiding	their	own	feelings.	If	you	notice	a	repetitive	theme	to	your	self-talk,
you	are	probably	caught	in	a	control	pattern.

Uncovering	True	Intent



Sometimes	the	intent	of	someone’s	communication	(to	relate	or	to	control)	is
not	obvious	just	from	listening	to	the	words.	The	same	words	can	be	spoken	with
different	 intentions	behind	 them.	Here	 is	 an	 example:	 “I	 resent	 you	 for	 saying
you	won’t	 go	 to	 the	party	with	me!”	 If	 you	hear	 these	words,	 do	you	 feel	 the
person	 is	 controlling	 or	 relating?	Are	 you	 being	 asked	 to	 change	 so	 the	 other
person	 won’t	 feel	 upset,	 or	 are	 you	 being	 given	 information	 about	 this	 other
person	 with	 the	 understanding	 that	 you	 will	 decide	 for	 yourself	 what	 your
response	will	be?	At	times,	it	is	difficult	to	tell.	People	can	use	I	messages	and
experiential	language	and	still	be	intent	on	manipulating	you,	punishing	you,	or
making	you	feel	bad.

People	can	use	I	messages	and	experiential	language	and	still
be	intent	on	manipulating	you,	punishing	you,	or	making	you
feel	bad.

If	you	are	in	doubt,	you	may	have	to	ask:	“What	is	your	intent	in	sharing	that?
Are	you	trying	to	get	me	to	do	what	you	want?	Are	you	expressing	your	upset	so
you	can	move	beyond	it?	Do	you	want	me	to	feel	bad?	Are	you	trying	to	show
that	you’re	right?	Are	you	trying	to	make	sure	I	don’t	get	angry	with	you?	Are
you	 showing	 me	 how	 my	 behavior	 affects	 you	 so	 I	 can	 decide	 if	 I	 want	 to
change?”	Notice	how	you	feel	around	other	people	when	they	are	controlling	as
compared	 to	 relating.	 This	 practice	 will	 help	 you	 determine	 your	 own	 intent
when	you	communicate	with	others.	As	you	become	accustomed	to	making	the
distinction	 between	 controlling	 and	 relating,	 notice	 how	 your	 internal	 feelings
differ	depending	on	your	intent.	Notice	the	results	you	get	when	you	are	relating
versus	controlling.

Noticing	Your	Intent	in	a	Nutshell

•	In	most	human	interactions	relating	is	preferable	to	controlling	because	it
brings	you	into	the	present;	it	helps	you	trust	yourself;	it	helps	you	trust	the
unknown;	and	it	helps	others	feel	connected	to	you.	Also,	most	people	resist
or	close	up	around	others’	controlling	behavior	even	if	they	appear	to	be
going	along	with	it.

•	Although	there	are	times	when	controlling	is	the	way	to	go	(when	you’re	on



a	sailboat	in	the	ocean	and	a	storm	comes	up,	it’s	perfectly	appropriate	for
the	captain	to	start	barking	orders	to	the	crew,	or	when	the	building	is	on	fire,
it	would	be	ridiculous	to	ask	whether	people	feel	like	exiting	the	building),
most	interpersonal	communication	does	not	involve	that	kind	of	danger.	In
most	situations,	we	can’t	expect	others	to	act	on	our	behalf	unless	they	feel
some	connection	to	us.	That	sense	of	connection	comes	from	relating.

•	Most	people	exhibit	a	variety	of	unconscious	control	patterns.	These	patterns
limit	your	freedom	of	expression.	They	keep	your	energy	locked	into
repetitive,	compulsive	behavior	—	such	as	overtalking,	explaining,
comparing	the	present	to	the	past,	or	smiling	no	matter	how	you	feel.	Control
patterns	reinforce	the	belief	that	you	need	the	pattern	to	feel	safe.	Noticing
and	unlocking	the	conditioned	fears	and	beliefs	associated	with	your	control
patterns	can	get	your	energy	flowing	again	and	give	you	the	confidence	that
no	matter	what	life	deals	you,	you’ll	be	able	to	handle	it.

•	In	these	times	of	shifting	paradigms,	there	will	be	moments	when	you	choose
to	control	and	moments	when	you	choose	to	relate.	The	important	thing	is	to
look	honestly	at	what	your	need	to	control	is	designed	to	protect	you	from
and	whether	it	actually	supports	your	well-being.



CHAPTER	5
WELCOMING	FEEDBACKCK

IT’S	HOW	WE
LEARN

So	far	I	have	emphasized	the	value	of	revealing	yourself	to	others	without	too
much	attention	to	how	other	people	react	to	you.	In	this	chapter,	the	emphasis
will	be	on	being	open	to	the	effect	you	have	on	the	people	around	you	and
learning	about	your	effect	through	welcoming	feedback.	Welcoming	feedback
means	that	you	want	to	hear	the	truth,	even	if	it’s	uncomfortable.	It	means	you’re
genuinely	curious	and	interested	in	other	people’s	realities.	Welcoming	feedback
is	an	essential	aspect	of	relating.	When	you	are	not	open	to	how	your	actions	are
being	received,	then	you’re	controlling.
Let	me	 tell	you	a	 story	about	my	 relationship	with	my	 father	 that	 illustrates

what	 happens	 when	 people	 don’t	 feel	 that	 you	 want	 their	 input.	When	 I	 was
about	ten,	I	was	always	uneasy	around	my	father.	He	always	seemed	so	busy,	so
I	was	 afraid	 to	bother	him.	 I	 had	 the	 impression	 that	 he	 just	wanted	 to	get	 on
with	what	 he	was	 doing	 and	 didn’t	 have	 any	 spare	 attention	 to	 give	me.	 So	 I
pretty	much	kept	out	of	his	way.
Behind	 my	 family	 home	 was	 an	 old	 barnlike	 structure,	 which	 my	 parents

allowed	 me	 to	 use	 as	 my	 playhouse.	 Originally,	 it	 had	 been	 designed	 as	 a
carpentry	workshop.	There	was	a	workbench	and	a	place	for	tools,	but	since	my
father	wasn’t	a	handyman,	I	got	to	use	it	instead	as	my	retreat	from	the	adults.	I
called	 it	 the	 “Becker	 Street	 Playhouse.”	 It	 was	 my	 own	 little	 neighborhood
theater,	where	I	put	on	circuses,	plays,	and	magic	shows	for	my	 three	younger
brothers	and	their	friends.
One	day,	as	I	was	planning	my	next	magic	show,	I	got	a	brilliant	idea	—	or	so

it	seemed	at	the	time.	My	parents	had	just	given	me	their	old	dining	room	set	so
that	I	could	upgrade	the	furnishings	in	the	playhouse.	I	planned	to	use	the	dining
table	to	display	my	props	and	the	chairs	to	seat	my	audience.	And	then	there	was



this	beautiful	old	sideboard	that	had	been	used	to	store	linens	and	dishes.	What
would	I	do	with	that?	As	I	opened	its	double	doors,	I	realized	that	I	could	fit	my
entire	 little	body	 inside.	This	 led	 to	my	brilliant	 idea.	 I	could	 remove	 the	back
and	tack	a	tan-colored	drape	over	the	opening	so	that	it	still	looked	solid.	Then	I
would	cut	a	hole	 in	 the	floor	right	behind	 it	so	I	could	easily	slip	out	 the	back
and	 drop	 down	 into	 the	 basement	—	 a	 drop	 of	 about	 five	 feet.	 As	 the	 grand
finale	of	my	magic	show,	I	would	do	a	disappearing	act!	I	would	say	some	magic
words,	climb	into	the	sideboard,	close	the	doors,	and	deftly	disappear,	a	moment
later	to	reappear	at	the	rear	of	the	room	near	the	basement	stairs.	I	performed	this
feat	 of	 magic	 many	 times	 to	 the	 continued	 amazement	 of	 the	 neighborhood
children.

Welcoming	feedback	means	that	you	want	to	hear	the	truth,
even	if	it’s	uncomfortable.	It	means	you’re	genuinely	curious
and	interested	in	other	people’s	realities.

One	 day,	my	 father	 decided	 to	 come	 out	 to	 the	 workshop	 and	 have	 a	 look
around.	He	still	thought	of	it	as	his	workshop,	even	though	I’d	done	a	lot	more
carpentry	out	 there	 than	he	 ever	 had	—	 like	 sawing	out	 those	 floorboards	 and
replacing	them	with	a	very	thin,	easily	removable	piece	of	plywood.	He	looked
around	my	 playhouse	with	 a	 frown.	 “I	 don’t	 like	 how	 you	 have	 the	 furniture
arranged	in	here,”	he	announced.	(I	had	placed	the	sideboard	in	the	center	of	the
room	to	cover	the	hole	in	the	floor.)	“This	should	be	up	against	a	wall,”	he	said
as	he	stepped	toward	the	sideboard.
At	that	point	I	had	a	decision	to	make:	should	I	warn	him	or	just	hope	for	the

best?	 He	 didn’t	 seem	 at	 all	 interested	 in	 what	 I	 was	 starting	 to	 say.	Without
paying	 any	 attention	 to	my	 protestations,	 he	 lifted	 the	 sideboard	 off	 the	 hole,
stepped	 on	 that	 thin	 piece	 of	 plywood,	 and	 disappeared	 into	 the	 basement!
Fortunately,	he	wasn’t	too	badly	hurt,	just	some	scrapes	and	bruises,	so	later	on
we	all	had	a	good	laugh	about	the	incident.	However,	my	dad	felt	it	his	duty	to
board	up	the	hole	in	the	floor,	which	put	a	major	crimp	in	my	budding	career	as	a
magician.	 I	certainly	 learned	a	good	 lesson	actually:	 first,	 if	you	 let	 fear	get	 in
the	way	 of	 honest	 communication,	 you	 lose	 your	 power	 to	 create	magic;	 and
second,	 if	 people	 are	 afraid	 to	 tell	 you	 the	 truth,	 you	 could	 wind	 up	 in	 the
basement	like	my	father!



If	you	let	fear	get	in	the	way	of	honest	communication,	you
lose	your	power	to	create	magic.

The	Importance	of	Being	Approachable

Do	people	feel	they	can	be	honest	with	you?	Here	is	how	you	can	tell:	think	of
two	 or	 three	 significant	 relationships	 in	 your	 life.	 Now	 look	 back	 over	 your
interactions	with	these	people	in	the	past	year	and	recall	how	often	these	people
have	given	you	feedback	about	how	your	actions	affected	them	or	came	across	to
them	 or	 how	 they	 would	 prefer	 you	 do	 something.	 If	 you	 have	 received
feedback,	has	it	been	only	positive?	Some	feedback	is	better	than	no	feedback	at
all,	 but	 if	 you	 get	 only	 positive	 feedback,	 people	may	 have	 the	 idea	 that	 you
don’t	 want	 to	 hear	 information	 that	 doesn’t	 jibe	 with	 your	 self-image.	 (And
maybe	that’s	true,	so	now	would	be	a	good	time	to	admit	it!)
A	postal	worker	friend	of	mine	likes	to	tell	this	story	about	the	importance	of

staying	open	to	feedback.	At	a	certain	city	post	office,	no	one	liked	the	day-shift
supervisor,	Jane.	Jane	was	one	of	those	people	who	gave	the	less	desirable	jobs
to	anyone	who	dared	to	make	suggestions	about	a	more	effective	ways	to	get	the
job	done.	The	feedback	her	employees	were	giving	her	was	not	even	personal;	it
was	about	how	to	ensure	that	all	 the	work	got	done	on	time.	But	Jane	couldn’t
hear	 it.	 So	 her	 employees	 decided	 not	 to	 inform	 her	 anymore	 when	 things
weren’t	 proceeding	 according	 to	 plan.	 “If	 she	 wants	 to	 think	 there	 are	 no
problems	around	here,	we’ll	let	her,”	they	decided.
In	 the	post	office,	 some	 important	 jobs	have	 to	be	done	at	 specific	 times	 so

that	 each	 piece	 of	 equipment	 is	 available	 when	 needed	 and	 so	 that	 certain
bundles	of	mail	 are	 ready	when	pickup	 time	comes.	Unbeknownst	 to	 Jane,	 for
more	 than	a	week	no	one	was	at	 a	particularly	critical	workstation	 from	11:00
A.M.	to	noon,	which	was	just	the	time	these	bundles	needed	to	be	sorted	so	they
would	get	out	on	time.	All	her	employees	knew	that	this	station	was	vacant	and
that	the	work	wasn’t	getting	done,	but	no	one	bothered	to	inform	Jane.	It	was	her
job	to	tell	people	which	job	to	do,	and	if	she	didn’t	specifically	tell	someone	to
be	 somewhere,	 they	 acted	 as	 if	 they	 didn’t	 know.	 So	 they	 all	 watched	with	 a
certain	 glee	 when,	 a	 few	 days	 later,	 Jane	 got	 in	 trouble	 with	 her	 boss	 for
overlooking	a	problem	that	significantly	slowed	down	postal	service	operations,
not	only	at	this	location	but	also	at	several	others	down	the	line.	Jane	finally	got



to	see	where	her	“don’t	tell	me	how	to	do	my	job”	management	style	had	gotten
her.

If	people	aren’t	approaching	you	with	uncomfortable
feedback,	you	may	want	to	ask	yourself	how	well	you	are
listening.	Are	you	open	to	and	curious	about	all	types	of
information?	Do	you	ever	unwittingly	blame	the	messenger?

If	people	aren’t	approaching	you	with	uncomfortable	feedback,	you	may	want
to	ask	yourself	how	well	you	are	listening.	Are	you	open	to	and	curious	about	all
types	of	 information?	Do	you	ever	unwittingly	blame	the	messenger?	about	all
types	of	information?	Do	you	welcome	feedback	about	how	you	are	perceived?
Are	you	receptive	to	bad	news?	Do	you	ever	unwittingly	blame	the	messenger?
Because	 Jane’s	 employees	 believed	 they	 would	 be	 punished	 for	 giving	 her
honest	feedback,	they	now	chose	to	withhold	potentially	helpful	information.	If
you	want	to	continually	grow	and	learn,	and	avoid	what	happened	to	both	Jane
and	my	father,	you	need	to	demonstrate	that	you	are	open	to	feedback.

Curiosity	is	actually	an	innate	characteristic	of	human	beings,
but	if	the	feedback	you	received	as	a	youngster	was	overly
critical	or	punitive,	you	may	have	learned	that	no	news	is
good	news.

I	 have	 several	 friends	with	 teenage	 children.	Whenever	one	of	 these	 friends
tells	 me	 a	 story	 of	 how	 their	 son	 or	 daughter	 stood	 up	 to	 them,	 I	 always
compliment	them	on	being	the	kind	of	parent	kids	feel	they	can	be	honest	with.
When	the	people	who	depend	on	you	are	able	to	speak	their	mind	to	you,	it	is	a
testimony	 to	 the	 level	 of	 trust	 between	 you.	 The	 ability	 to	welcome	 feedback
also	 requires	 that	 you	 feel	 genuine	 curiosity	 about	 how	 your	 behavior	 affects
others.	Such	curiosity	is	actually	an	innate	characteristic	of	human	beings,	but	if
the	 feedback	 you	 received	 as	 a	 youngster	was	 overly	 critical	 or	 punitive,	 you
may	have	learned	that	no	news	is	good	news,	an	example	of	“learning	the	wrong
thing.”	You	developed	a	belief	that	it’s	not	safe	to	hear	feedback,	that	it	hurts	too
much.	Practicing	the	first	three	truth	skills	covered	so	far	(experiencing	what	is,



being	transparent,	and	knowing	your	intent)	can	help	you	to	rekindle	your	innate
curiosity,	helping	you	to	shift	from	seeking	safety	to	seeking	truth.

Self-Assessment	Quiz

The	 following	 quiz	 will	 help	 you	 assess	 your	 openness	 to	 feedback.	 Give
yourself	a	1	to	5	rating	for	each	statement	(with	1	being	usually	not	true	of	you
and	5	being	mostly	true).

1.	People	rarely	give	me	feedback	about	how	my	behavior	affects	them.
2.	I	do	not	ask	people	for	feedback	about	how	my	behavior	affects	them.
3.	If	someone	does	give	me	feedback	and	I’m	unclear	about	what	they	mean,	I
wouldn’t	ask	them	to	be	more	specific.

4.	I	do	not	offer	feedback	to	others.
5.	I	have	never	really	benefited	from	feedback.
6.	If	I	get	negative	feedback,	I	go	into	a	self-critical,	self-doubting	mood	that
can	last	all	day	or	longer.

7.	If	I	get	negative	feedback,	I	usually	just	think,	“That’s	their	problem.”

If	 you	 answered	 3,	 4,	 or	 5	 to	 two	 or	 more	 of	 these	 items,	 you	 need	 more
practice	 with	 this	 truth	 skill.	 If	 you	 avoid	 receiving	 feedback	 (even	 if	 you’re
doing	it	unconsciously,	as	in,	“I	don’t	know	why...people	just	never	give	me	any
feedback”),	you’re	probably	trying	to	dodge	some	kind	of	discomfort	—	perhaps
the	 discomfort	 of	 experiencing	 a	 gap	 between	 how	 you	 see	 yourself	 and	 how
someone	 else	 sees	 you.	 Avoiding	 discomfort	 is	 dangerous	 and	 can	 lead	 to
hearing	bad	news	only	after	it	is	too	late	to	do	anything	about	it,	like	after	your
marriage	 is	 already	 on	 the	 rocks.	 In	 fact,	 avoiding	 anything	 is	 the	 opposite	 of
openness	to	what	is.

Why	Seek	Feedback?

Avoiding	discomfort	is	dangerous	and	can	lead	to	hearing	bad
news	only	after	it	is	too	late	to	do	anything	about	it,	like	after
your	marriage	is	already	on	the	rocks.



Feedback	 between	people	 constitutes	 a	 powerful	 form	of	 contact.	The	more
powerful	the	contact	you	invite	into	your	life,	the	more	you’ll	be	able	to	handle
such	 contact	 skillfully	 and	with	 awareness.	Asking	 for	 and	 receiving	 feedback
strengthens	your	capacity	to	connect	and	to	form	intimate	relationships.	You	are
letting	yourself	be	affected	by	another	person.	Asking	for	feedback	from	another
establishes	the	fact	that	you	are	interested	in	her	viewpoint	and	that	you	are	open
to	learning	with	and	from	this	person.	This	practice	can	also	strengthen	the	trust
between	you.

Feedback	between	people	constitutes	a	powerful	form	of
contact.	The	more	powerful	the	contact	you	invite	into	your
life,	the	more	you’ll	be	able	to	handle	such	contact	skillfully
and	with	awareness.

I	 often	 seek	 constructive	 criticism	 from	 clients	 and	 seminar	 participants.	 I
learn	so	much	from	seeing	myself	through	others’	eyes.	A	few	hours	ago,	I	got	a
call	from	a	woman,	Enid,	who	was	debating	whether	to	attend	my	next	seminar.
She	was	unsure	because	 she	had	 experienced	 some	discomfort	 in	 the	previous
seminar.	 I	 asked	 her	 to	 tell	me	 about	 it.	 She	 told	me	 that	 in	 a	 certain	 partner
exercise	we	did,	she	had	felt	pressure	to	get	closer	to	her	partner	than	she	really
wanted	 to.	 It	was	 an	 exercise	 in	which	we	practiced	 communicating	 truthfully
about	 the	 level	 of	 closeness	 we	 were	 comfortable	 sharing	 and	 asserting	 our
wants	accordingly.	I	had	encouraged	people	not	to	conform	to	what	their	partner
seemed	to	want	and	to	stay	true	to	themselves,	but	Enid	hadn’t	completely	been
able	to.	At	that	point,	I	realized	that	I	had	not	given	the	group	enough	time	at	the
end	of	 the	exercise	 to	discuss	 their	difficulties	staying	 true	 to	 themselves.	This
incident	was	a	good	lesson	for	me.	I	told	her	I	imagined	she	was	not	the	only	one
who	had	had	difficulty	 saying	no	or	marking	 their	boundaries.	She	agreed	and
then	said,	“Now	that	I’ve	had	a	chance	to	talk	with	you	about	this,	I	do	feel	like
taking	your	next	seminar.	I’d	like	to	sign	up	right	now.”
The	lesson	I	learned	from	this	incident	is	that	when	you	allow	people	to	give

you	feedback	about	something	they	have	been	withholding,	it	clears	the	air	and
the	two	of	you	can	get	back	to	feeling	open	and	relaxed	with	each	other.	For	this
reason,	whenever	 I’m	coaching	people	 in	 the	 corporate	 sector	who	want	 to	be
politically	 successful	 in	 the	 company,	 I	 always	 encourage	 them	 to	 ask	 for
feedback	 frequently	 from	 their	 superiors,	 peers,	 and	 employees.	 Asking	 for



feedback	means	that	people	won’t	be	backstabbing	you,	because	they’ve	gotten	a
chance	to	air	their	grievances	and	therefore	have	probably	gotten	over	them.	But
more	important,	receiving	feedback	allows	you	to	continually	learn	and	improve
your	performance,	a	vital	ingredient	in	a	successful	career.

When	you	allow	people	to	give	you	feedback	about	something
they	have	been	withholding,	it	clears	the	air	and	the	two	of
you	can	get	back	to	feeling	open	and	relaxed	with	each	other
.

Feedback	Practices

There	are	many	ways	 in	which	you	can	welcome	feedback.	You	can	(1)	ask
for	it	out	of	the	blue;	(2)	ask	for	it	in	response	to	something	another	person	says;
(3)	notice	something	that	piques	your	interest	and	inquiring	about	it;	or	(4)	have
a	regularly	scheduled	feedback	ritual.
1.	Asking	for	it	out	of	the	blue.	If	I’m	feeling	okay	about	my	connection	with

someone	but	I	want	to	check	in	to	learn	how	things	are	from	her	point	of	view,
I’ll	 say:	“I’m	feeling	clear	about	our	connection.	 I	can’t	 think	of	anything	I’ve
withheld	or	any	unfinished	business.	How	about	you?	Is	there	anything	you	have
to	 say	 to	 me	 that	 you	 haven’t	 said?”	 Then	 I’ll	 really	 pay	 attention,	 because
sometimes	a	person	will	take	a	while	to	warm	up	to	the	question,	and	they	will
beat	 around	 the	bush	 for	 a	while	before	 they	discover	 that	 they	do	have	 some
feedback	to	offer.
2.	Asking	 for	 it	 in	 response	 to	 something	 another	 person	 says.	 Sometimes

somebody	 will	 make	 an	 offhand	 remark	 that	 seems	 to	 have	 an	 aggressive	 or
provocative	edge	to	it.	If	this	occurs,	I’ll	say,	“I	heard	you	say,	‘___,’	and	I	felt
something	 funny	 in	 my	 gut.	 I’m	 wondering	 if	 there’s	 something	 going	 on
between	you	and	me	that	I’m	not	aware	of.”	Another	situation	in	which	I	might
pick	 up	 on	 another’s	 comment	 and	 seek	 feedback	 is	 if	 their	 comment	 seems
confused	or	 unrelated	 to	 the	 present	moment.	Then	 I	might	 again	 state	what	 I
heard	and	ask	if	there’s	more	going	on	that	I’m	not	aware	of.
3.	Noticing	 something	 that	 piques	 your	 interest.	 Sometimes	 another	 person

will	act	in	a	way	that	seems	unusual	or	out	of	character.	Or	maybe	they’ve	made
an	agreement	and	haven’t	kept	it.	Then	I	might	say:	“I	noticed___,	and	it	seems



like	something	I’ve	never	seen	you	do	before	(or	it	seems	like	it’s	getting	to	be	a
pattern	with	 us,	 and	 so	 on).	 I’m	wondering	what’s	 going	 on.	 I’d	 like	 us	 to	 be
open	and	honest	with	each	other,	even	if	it’s	uncomfortable	at	times.”
4.	Having	a	regularly	scheduled	 feedback	ritual.	 If	a	 relationship	 is	ongoing

and	important,	such	as	with	a	spouse,	a	housemate,	or	a	business	partner,	I	think
it’s	a	good	practice	to	do	a	clearing-the-air	practice	on	a	regular	basis	—	daily,
weekly,	monthly,	or	whatever	 feels	 right	 to	both	of	you	(or	 to	all	of	you,	as	 in
family	meetings).	The	next	section	describes	a	few	of	my	favorite	rituals.

Rituals	for	Welcoming	Feedback

I	 discussed	 the	 resentments	 and	 appreciations	 clearing	 ritual	 in	 chapter	 3.
That’s	 one	 good	 way	 to	 keep	 communication	 channels	 open	 and	 free	 of
unfinished	business.	Below	are	two	others.	In	all	these	rituals,	both	people	need
to	agree	on	the	frequency	and	time	limits	for	the	sessions.	If	you	don’t	wish	to
have	 a	 regular	 ritual,	 or	 even	 if	 you	 do,	 these	 practices	 can	 also	 be	 done
spontaneously	 any	 time	 you’re	 aware	 of	 needing	 one.	 Don’t	 think	 that	 just
because	you	have	a	time	set	aside	to	share	feedback	in	two	days	that	you	have	to
wait	until	then.
Sharing	“withholds”	is	a	great	way	to	clear	the	air.	I	learned	this	process	from

More	 University	 in	 northern	 California.	 Partner	 A	 starts:	 “John,	 there’s
something	 I’ve	withheld	 from	you.”	Partner	B	 says,	 “Okay,	would	you	 like	 to
tell	me?”	Then	Partner	A	relates	something	she	felt	or	 thought,	such	as,	“I	 felt
disappointed	that	you	didn’t	get	me	a	birthday	present.”	Partner	B	says,	“Thank
you.”	The	“thank	you”	signals	the	end	of	that	turn.	If	Partner	B	feels	a	need	to
bring	 up	 the	 issue	 again,	 he	 can	 do	 so	 during	 his	 turn	 as	 in,	 “Jane,	 there’s
something	I’ve	withheld	from	you.”	Partner	A	says,	“Okay,”	and	then	Partner	B
might	 say,	 “I	 feel	 sorry	 that	 I	 didn’t	 at	 least	make	you	 a	 card.	 If	 I	 could	do	 it
over,	I’d	plan	way	ahead	and	get	you	something	really	special.”	Then	Partner	A
says,	“Thank	you.”
Saying	 “thank	 you”	 is	 an	 important	 part	 of	 the	 practice,	 because	 it

acknowledges	the	other	person.	It	does	not	necessarily	mean	you	are	pleased.	It
keeps	 the	partners	 from	getting	 into	a	discussion,	 since	 the	 idea	of	 the	 sharing
withholds	ritual	is	simply	to	share	information	about	your	current	reality.	Often
doing	 so	 is	 all	 that	 is	 needed	 to	 clear	 the	 issue.	 Resentments	 or	 appreciations
could	 also	 be	 expressed	 within	 the	 structure	 of	 sharing	 withholds.	 So	 could



feedback	in	the	form	“when	you___,	I	felt___”	(described	below).
Another	 great	 practice	 is	 to	 state,	 “When	you	 said	 (or	 did)	 that,	 I	 felt	 this.”

Each	 person	 takes	 a	 turn	 completing	 the	 sentence,	 “When	 you	 (something
specific	 that	 was	 done	 or	 said),	 I	 felt...”	 (a	 feeling	 or	 sensation,	 your	 actual
experience,	as	in	experiencing	what	is).	For	example,	“When	you	walked	out	in
the	 middle	 of	 my	 sharing,	 I	 felt	 anger.”	 Another	 alternative	 to	 is	 to	 add	 a
statement	 about	where	 in	your	body	you	 experienced	 this:	 “When	you	walked
out	in	the	middle	of	my	sharing,	I	felt	the	heat	of	anger	rising	in	my	face.”
All	these	clearing	rituals	are	designed	to	be	short	and	sweet.	You	simply	say

what	you	experienced,	being	very	specific,	and	 let	 the	other	person	respond	 to
the	 information	as	 she	will.	You	are	not	asking	her	 to	change	anything.	 (We’ll
get	 to	asking	for	a	change	 in	 the	next	chapter,	“Asserting	What	You	Want	and
Don’t	Want.”)	 If	you	find	 that	you	need	 to	resolve	a	conflict	or	go	deeper	 into
understanding	each	other’s	viewpoint,	then	active	listening	can	be	useful.	In	this
process,	one	person	is	the	talker	and	the	other	is	listener.	When	it	is	Partner	A’s
turn,	 he	 states	 his	 feelings	 or	 views.	 Partner	B	 listens	 and	 then	 says	what	 she
heard	 A	 say,	 reflecting	 back	 both	 content	 and	 feelings.	 Active	 listening	 is	 a
wonderful	tool	to	use	when	two	people	are	having	a	conflict	or	disagreement.	It
helps	you	stay	focused	on	what	you	are	hearing	when	it	might	be	difficult	to	hear
—	like	when	you	don’t	agree	with	it.	Active	listening	is	most	useful	in	conflict
or	 potential	 conflict	 situations,	 so	 I’ll	 describe	 it	 more	 fully	 in	 chapter	 9,
“Holding	Differences.”

Practices	for	Receiving	Feedback

The	first	thing	to	do	when	you	have	received	feedback	is	to	pause	and	take	it
in.	Notice	 the	 sensations	 and	 feelings	 in	 your	 body.	Notice	 your	 thoughts:	Do
you	 agree	 with	 the	 feedback	 or	 not?	 Do	 you	 feel	 any	 internal	 pressure	 to
conform	to	the	other	person’s	wishes?	Remember,	it	is	your	choice	what	you	do
about	 the	 feedback.	You	 are	 not	 obligated	 to	 change	 anything.	 Listen	 to	 your
self-talk.	 Did	 your	 inner	 critic	 get	 triggered?	 Did	 you	 automatically	 discount
what	was	said?	Did	you	get	defensive?

The	first	thing	to	do	when	you	have	received	feedback	is	to
pause	and	take	it	in.	Notice	the	sensations	and	feelings	in	your
body.



In	 replying	 to	 feedback,	 keep	 it	 simple.	After	 you	 have	 taken	 some	 time	 to
really	take	in	what	the	other	has	told	you,	acknowledge	him	for	what	he	has	said.
If	the	feedback	is	surprising	or	troubling,	acknowledge	this	without	agreeing	or
disagreeing	with	 the	 content	—	 at	 least	 at	 this	 point.	 It’s	 also	 a	 good	 idea	 to
practice	active	 listening	 if	 the	 feedback	 is	hard	 to	hear.	This	gives	you	 time	 to
assimilate	the	feedback	before	responding.
If	the	feedback	is	vague	or	general,	or	if	you’re	not	clear	what	the	other	person

means,	ask	her	to	be	more	specific.	This	is	important	and	is	different	from	being
defensive.	 If	you’re	going	 to	 learn	anything,	and	 if	 the	other	person’s	going	 to
clear	the	air,	both	of	you	need	to	know	what	you	specifically	did	and	what	she
felt.
In	receiving	feedback,	see	if	you	can	adopt	an	attitude	of	openness	to	learning.

Avoid	defending	yourself,	making	excuses	for	what	you	did,	or	passing	the	buck.
I	have	seen	so	many	relationships	destroyed	when	they	could	have	been	healed
simply	because	the	person	receiving	feedback	could	not	handle	the	feelings	that
were	triggered	by	it	and	went	immediately	into	a	defensive	or	aggressive	control
pattern.
It	 is	 good	 practice	 when	 you’re	 first	 learning	 about	 feedback	 to	 receive	 it

without	too	much	verbal	response,	breathing	slowly	and	deeply.	This	helps	you
learn	 to	 fully	 experience	 the	 other’s	words	 and	 your	 feelings.	 This	 practice	 is
especially	 important	 if	you	 tend	 to	get	defensive	or	 if	you	get	 triggered	easily.
Sometimes	quick,	 impulsive	 self-expression	 can	be	 an	 escape	 from	 feeling	 the
discomfort	of	your	true	feelings.
When	people	see	you	as	able	to	receive	feedback	and	to	be	with	your	feelings

instead	of	controlling	the	situation	to	make	yourself	comfortable,	they	feel	heard
or	received	and	they	tend	to	trust	you	more.	They	also	are	more	open	with	you
about	 things	 they	 might	 otherwise	 withhold.	 If	 you	 do	 choose	 to	 verbally
respond	to	the	feedback	right	away	(assuming	you	are	not	using	one	of	the	above
feedback	 rituals	 that	prohibits	 this),	 start	with	your	experience	as	you	hear	 the
feedback:	What	 sensations	 are	you	 aware	of	 in	your	body?	What	 emotions	 do
you	feel?	What	thoughts,	judgments,	and	self-talk	come	up?	These	are	what	you
need	to	share.	“Hearing	you	say	that	about	me,	I	feel	relieved.	I	was	afraid	you
were	going	 to	 say	 that	 it’s	over	between	us.”	Or,	 “Hearing	you	 say	 this,	 I	 feel
some	defensiveness.	 In	my	 self-talk	 I’m	debating	whether	 to	 share	 this	 or	 just
take	in	what	you	are	saying.”



Being	open	to	feedback	does	not	mean	you	swallow	the	other’s	impressions	of
you	as	the	truth.	It	means	letting	the	feedback	in	and	letting	it	have	an	impact	on
you.	Listening	to	feedback	is	different	from	agreeing	with	it	or	taking	it	on.	You
weigh	 it	 against	 other	 things	 you	 have	 seen	 in	 yourself	 and	 in	 the	 person
delivering	 the	feedback	and	against	other	peoples’	feedback	on	the	same	issue.
You	are	the	one	who	decides	whether	or	not	to	make	any	changes	based	on	what
you	have	heard.

Offering	Constructive	Feedback

For	feedback	to	be	useful	and	constructive,	certain	conditions	need	to	exist:
1.	Both	people	need	to	agree	that	it	is	a	good	time	to	share	feedback.	You	may

need	to	use	the	preface,	“I	have	some	feedback	for	you.	Is	this	a	good	time?”

Feedback	is	most	helpful	and	most	in	line	with	relating	when
you	do	not	criticize	or	ask	the	other	person	to	change.	It	is
essentially	information	about	you,	the	giver	of	the	feedback.

2.	Being	aware	of	your	intent	is	another	important	element.	Do	you	want	the
other	person	 to	see	how	you	are	seeing	him	(with	 the	 intent	of	 relating),	or	do
you	want	the	other	to	change	so	you	won’t	have	to	feel	uncomfortable	(with	the
intent	of	controlling)?	If	you	answered	yes	to	the	latter,	it’s	okay.	Remember,	it’s
what	is.	Don’t	try	to	hide	it.	In	fact,	“confessing”	your	intent	can	serve	the	goal
of	 transparency	 and	 make	 your	 feedback	 easier	 to	 hear.	 Sometimes	 after	 you
confess	your	 intent	and	offer	your	 feedback,	especially	 if	 it	 is	 received	openly,
your	intent	to	change	the	other	fades	away.	You	may	find	that	you	feel	satisfied
just	to	be	heard,	even	if	nothing	changes.	That’s	the	powerful	thing	about	being
openly	received:	it	helps	you	let	go	of	whatever	you	were	holding.
3.	Feedback	 is	most	helpful	and	most	 in	 line	with	 relating	when	you	do	not

criticize	 or	 ask	 the	 other	 person	 to	 change.	 It	 is	 essentially	 information	 about
you,	 the	 giver	 of	 the	 feedback.	 Often,	 by	 just	 telling	 someone	 how	 you
experienced	something	he	did,	you	trigger	some	very	useful	self-learning.	Once	I
was	telling	my	friend	Stan	about	how	another	friend	I’d	hired	to	do	some	work
for	me	tried	to	charge	me	for	services	not	rendered.	I	told	Stan	about	my	feelings
of	anger	at	this	person.	When	I	finished	my	story,	Stan	said,	“When	you	told	me



how	he	tried	to	charge	you	extra,	I	felt	sadness	in	my	throat.”	As	soon	as	Stan
said	this,	I	realized	that	I,	 too,	had	felt	sadness	as	well	as	anger.	Stan’s	simple,
nonprescriptive	feedback	helped	me	connect	more	deeply	to	something	I	had	not
been	aware	of.
4.	It’s	best	to	share	your	feedback	as	close	to	the	time	you	felt	the	feelings	as

possible.	 But	 if	 you	weren’t	 present	 enough	 to	 your	 true	 reaction	 at	 the	 time,
using	the	“when	you	did	this,	I	felt	that”	form	works	very	well.
5.	 If	 you	 notice	 the	 other	 person	 getting	 defensive,	 be	 prepared	 to	 actively

listen	 to	him.	After	hearing	his	comments,	 repeat	back	 to	him	what	you	heard,
including	both	 the	 content	of	his	 statements	 and	his	 feelings.	Doing	 this	gives
you	a	way	to	stay	centered	and	nonreactive.	It	gives	your	mind	something	to	do.
Then	you	can	hear	him	with	more	spaciousness	in	your	awareness.

Welcoming	Feedback	in	a	Nutshell

•	Asking	for	feedback	strengthens	your	capacity	to	connect	and	to	form
intimate	relationships.

•	It	establishes	the	fact	that	you	are	interested	in	the	other	person’s	input,	thus
helping	to	build	trust.

•	Welcoming	feedback	allows	the	other	person	to	unload	whatever	they	may
be	feeling	about	you	and	to	get	over	it.

•	When	receiving	feedback,	get	centered,	breathe,	and	aim	to	relate	—	to	know
and	be	known.

•	When	giving	feedback,	be	sure	it’s	a	good	time	for	the	other	person	to	hear
it.	Be	specific,	and	tell	about	you	and	your	feelings.	Don’t	judge,	interpret,
or	prescribe	what	the	other	should	do.

•	In	your	important	relationships,	set	aside	some	regular	time	for	feedback	or
clearing	rituals:	resentments	and	appreciations,	sharing	withholds,	or	stating,
“When	you___,	I	felt___.”



CHAPTER	6
ASSERTING	WHAT	YOU	WANT

AND	DON’T	WANT
SUPPORTING	YOUR	FEELINGS

WITH	ACTION

“I’m	not	 appreciated	 around	here,”	Karl	 thought	 to	 himself.	 “If	 I	 resign	 from
this	 job,	 then	 they’ll	 see	 how	 much	 they	 need	 me.”	 This	 type	 of	 self-talk	 is
common	 in	Karl’s	 inner	world.	He	 doesn’t	 ask	 for	what	 he	wants,	 because	 he
fears	he	may	be	rebuffed.	So	instead	he	entertains	fantasies	of	quitting	his	 job.
He	muses	 about	 how	 the	 world	 isn’t	 fair,	 how	 people	 don’t	 look	 out	 for	 one
another	the	way	they	should.
Carla	 is	 in	a	similar	situation	 in	her	marriage.	She	 is	 the	breadwinner	 in	 the

family,	but	her	husband	Rudy	does	most	of	the	spending.	He	buys	himself	a	new
truck.	He	 buys	 expensive	 sporting	 equipment.	He	 buys	 things	 he’ll	 never	 use.
But	 he	 ridicules	 her	 if	 she	 spends	 extra	 money	 on	 groceries	 to	 get	 the	 best
quality	meats	 and	 vegetables.	 Carla	 has	 tried	 to	 speak	 her	mind	 to	 Rudy,	 but
since	 he	 doesn’t	 honor	 her	wishes,	 she’s	 pretty	much	 given	 up.	 Now	 she	 just
fantasizes	about	divorcing	him.
Karl	and	Carla	both	have	trouble	expressing	what	they	want	and	don’t	want.

As	 a	 result,	 their	 lives	 are	 clogged	 up	 with	 unfinished	 business	 and	 fantasies
about	 a	world	 that	 doesn’t	 exist,	 about	what	 someone	 should	 have	 done,	 how
people	should	treat	 them,	and	how	much	better	 it	will	be	when	 they	are	out	of
this	 situation.	 Unless	 they	 learn	 to	 stand	 up	 for	 themselves	 and	 express	 their
wants,	regardless	of	the	probable	outcome,	they	can	each	look	forward	to	a	life
of	“if	onlys.”
Truth	skill	#5,	asserting	what	you	want	and	don’t	want,	draws	on	the	first	two

skills,	experiencing	what	is	and	being	transparent.	To	support	your	feelings,	you
need	to	know	what	those	feelings	are.	And	you	need	to	be	willing	to	reveal	that



you	 do	 have	 feelings	 and	 desires.	 In	 my	 younger	 days	 I,	 too,	 had	 trouble
asserting	what	I	wanted.	I	could	mention	my	wants	once	or	twice,	but	if	I	got	a
no	 or	 was	 ignored	 or	 criticized	 for	 speaking	 up,	 after	 a	 few	 attempts	 I	 pretty
much	gave	up.	Here’s	how	I	learned	to	stay	with	my	wants,	even	in	the	face	of
very	 strong	 resistance.	 I	 was	 married	 to	 a	 man	 who	 was	 a	 graduate	 student
writing	his	doctoral	 thesis.	He	was	overwhelmed	by	the	responsibilities	he	had
taken	on	—	being	a	student	while	trying	to	hold	down	a	job	and	participate	fully
in	 the	other	 responsibilities	of	being	married	and	owning	a	home.	Sex	was	 the
farthest	thing	from	his	mind.	He	was	in	survival	mode	most	of	the	time.	I	was	in
my	twenties	and	in	my	sexual	prime.	Whenever	I	wanted	to	make	love,	he	had
an	excuse.	Hearing	his	excuses	became	painful.	So	I	gave	up,	stopped	asking	to
make	 love,	 and	 lived	 in	 a	 fantasy	 world,	 often	 imagining	 my	 former	 lover
coming	to	rescue	me,	showering	me	with	the	attention	I	longed	for.	During	that
period,	I	had	a	dream	one	night	that	woke	me	up	to	the	fact	that	I	was	in	pain,
more	pain	than	I	could	admit	to	in	my	waking	state.
In	the	dream,	I	was	walking	out	of	a	house.	I	was	suddenly	overcome	by	an

excruciating	pain	in	my	gut.	Even	though	I	was	dreaming,	the	pain	was	so	great
that	 it	 woke	me	 up.	 And	 the	 pain	 continued	 for	 a	 while	 after	 I	 was	 awake.	 I
stayed	with	the	pain,	feeling	its	size	and	shape	and	location.	After	a	few	minutes,
the	 pain	 seemed	 to	 speak	 to	me:	 “You	 have	 to	 stay	with	 your	 desires.	Do	 not
abandon	yourself.	Even	if	he	can’t	give	you	what	you	want,	don’t	stop	wanting.”
Walking	out	of	that	house	in	the	dream	was	like	walking	out	on	a	part	of	myself.
Fortunately,	 at	 that	 time	 I	was	 studying	 and	 teaching	Gestalt	 therapy	 at	 the

graduate	 school	 where	 I	 was	 an	 assistant	 professor.	 The	 primary	 message	 of
Gestalt	is	“stay	with	your	feelings,	experience	and	express	them	fully,	and	don’t
be	inhibited	by	your	fear	of	others’	disapproval.”	My	Gestalt	community	was	a
great	support	for	me	during	this	troubled	time.	I	was	also	working	with	my	own
therapist,	and	I’ll	never	forget	something	she	said	to	me:	“You	treat	yourself	like
you	can’t	handle	being	told	no.	I	think	you	can	handle	that.”
My	dream	with	the	awful	gut-wrenching	pain	was	telling	me	the	same	thing

—	that	 I	was	 in	pain	and	 that	 I	was	able	 to	handle	 it.	Staying	with	 the	 feeling
brought	 me	 a	 deep	 insight	 about	 what	 I	 needed	 to	 do.	 I	 needed	 to	 keep
expressing	my	 desires,	 even	 if	my	 husband	 couldn’t	meet	 them.	 I	 had	 to	 stop
caretaking	him,	stop	protecting	him	as	I	had	protected	my	mother	from	having	to
deal	with	my	hunger	as	an	infant	—	by	sleeping	most	of	the	time.	I	recognized
false	belief	#2	at	work,	the	belief	that	you	have	to	shut	down	your	feelings	to	not
make	 others	 uncomfortable.	 I	 was	 determined	 to	 get	 free	 of	 this	 limiting



conditioned	 reaction.	 I	 recognized	 that	 the	 pain	 I	was	 feeling	was	 the	 pain	 of
blocked	energy.	I	decided	to	get	myself	back	in	the	flow	of	life,	to	stop	cutting
off	my	self-expression	by	pretending	everything	was	okay.
I	told	my	husband	what	I	was	going	to	do.	I	said	that	I	intended	to	express	my

wants	whether	or	not	he	felt	like	responding	—	not	as	an	attempt	to	control	him
but	 to	break	out	of	my	play-it-safe	control	pattern.	 I	 simply	wanted	 to	become
freer	about	expressing	myself.	Shutting	down	my	feelings	wasn’t	working.	I	see
now	that	by	explaining	myself,	I	was	still	trying	to	protect	him	and	myself	from
the	full	force	of	a	painful	conflict	situation,	but	that’s	what	I	did,	and	at	the	time,
I	felt	pretty	good	about	myself.
So	from	that	time	forward	(until	our	divorce	many	years	later),	when	I	wanted

to	make	love,	I	would	say,	“I’d	like	to	make	love”	or	“I	feel	like	making	love”	or
“I’m	 feeling	horny”	or	 “I	would	 love	 to	 feel	 your	 body	 close	 to	mine.”	 I	 said
whatever	I	felt	at	the	time.	And	I	do	recall	feeling	quite	a	bit	of	fear	just	before	I
opened	my	mouth	to	speak,	the	first	dozen	or	so	times	I	did	this.	After	a	while,
though,	 it	got	easier.	I	continued	to	feel	sexual;	I	never	shut	down	and	went	 to
sleep	as	I	had	as	an	 infant.	That	was	my	aim	—	to	not	shut	down	my	feelings
just	because	my	husband	couldn’t	respond	to	them.	As	you	might	imagine,	this
was	a	difficult	period	of	my	life.	But	I	was	also	very	alive	 in	so	many	ways.	I
was	on	an	exciting	journey	of	discovery,	learning	about	all	the	ways	I	tended	to
cut	myself	off	from	my	feelings	to	stay	safe	and	in	control.	Those	years,	in	my
mid-to-late	twenties,	were	when	I	began	to	get	real.

Self-Assessment	Quiz

Are	you	ready	for	 the	quiz?	For	each	 item,	 rate	yourself	 from	1	(mostly	not
true)	to	5	(mostly	true).

1.	I	have	trouble	saying	no.
2.	I	have	trouble	asking	directly	for	what	I	want.
3.	I	hate	to	disappoint	people.
4.	I	think	people	take	advantage	of	my	good	nature.
5.	I	empathize	with	other	people’s	needs	and	viewpoints	more	easily	than	with
my	own.

6.	If	my	partner	wants	to	make	love,	talk,	or	do	something	else	with	me,	I’m
always	available.



7.	If	I’ve	asked	for	what	I	want	several	times	and	don’t	get	it,	I	tend	to	stop
asking.

How’d	you	do?	Again,	if	you	came	up	with	lots	of	3’s,	4’s,	and	5’s,	you	may
need	 more	 practice	 with	 asserting	 your	 wants.	 Number	 7	 is	 especially
challenging	for	most	people.	As	you	just	read,	it	was	a	tough	one	for	me.	If	your
score	 was	 high,	 don’t	 worry	—	 you’re	 in	 good	 company.	 Many	 people	 who
consider	 themselves	 honest	 have	difficulty	 asserting	what	 they	want	 and	don’t
want.	People	 like	Karl	and	Carla	are	actually	quite	effective	communicators	as
long	 as	 they	 don’t	 need	 to	 assert	 themselves!	 Both	 of	 them,	 like	 me,	 were
probably	 acting	 under	 the	 influence	 of	 false	 beliefs	 learned	 when	 they	 were
children,	beliefs	that	were	keeping	their	lives	stuck.	I	hope	you	are	beginning	to
see	how	important	it	is	to	continue	to	express	yourself,	even	when	it	seems	you
have	 little	 chance	of	 getting	what	 you	 ask	 for.	Practicing	 this	 truth	 skill	 keeps
your	energy	flowing.	It	keeps	you	from	getting	stuck.

Continue	to	express	yourself,	even	when	it	seems	you	have
little	chance	of	getting	what	you	ask	for.

False	Beliefs	about	Asserting	Wants

In	one	workshop	a	man	named	Michael	was	telling	us	a	short	version	of	his
life	story	as	part	of	an	exercise	about	uncovering	false	beliefs.	He	 told	us	how
his	 father	 always	 seemed	 to	 agree	 to	 do	 anything	 his	mother	wanted	—	 from
home	improvement	projects	to	vacations.	As	far	as	Michael	could	tell,	his	father
never	asserted	his	own	desires,	but	he	seemed	 really	happy,	unlike	his	mother,
who	 was	 always	 complaining.	 Michael’s	 story	 showed	 how	 he	 developed	 a
belief	that	it’s	better	to	be	compliant	and	happy	than	assertive	and	unhappy.	He
had	 unconsciously	 linked	 assertiveness	 with	 discontentedness	 and	 compliance
with	happiness	and	contentment.	Now,	as	an	adult,	Michael	continues	to	hold	on
to	this	belief.	Telling	his	life	story	helped	him	to	see	his	tendency	to	deny	what
is,	whenever	 clearly	perceiving	 reality	might	 lead	 to	 self-assertion.	 Just	 seeing
this	truth	helped	Michael	take	a	deeper	look	at	his	feelings	about	wanting	things.
He	 discovered	 that	 although	 sometimes	 he	was	 content	with	 how	 things	were
and	sometimes	he	was	not,	he	always	acted	as	if	he	was	content.	He	also	realized



that	he	sometimes	did	feel	his	wants	or	his	frustrations	many	days	or	weeks	after
the	fact.
Just	noticing	 this	pattern	was	a	good	start	 for	Michael.	Even	 if	his	 reactions

were	delayed,	he	was	beginning	to	see	that	he	did	have	desires	and	that	he	did
feel	 anger	 sometimes	when	 they	were	 frustrated.	He	 started	 using	 the	 tools	 in
this	chapter	and	this	got	his	energy	moving	again.

False	Belief	Exercise

If	 you’re	 like	most	 people,	 you	 probably	 have	 a	 painful	 childhood	memory
associated	with	 asking	 for	what	 you	want	 and	 being	 disappointed,	 ignored,	 or
punished.	 Take	 a	 break	 from	 reading,	 and	 do	 this	 exercise:	 Close	 your	 eyes,
relax,	and	let	yourself	drift	to	a	time	when	your	asking	for	something	resulted	in
pain,	yours	or	someone	else’s.	When	you	arrive	at	the	scene,	notice	who	is	with
you	and	what	else	is	going	on.	What	do	you	say,	do,	and	feel,	and	what	happens?
Once	you	feel	the	feelings,	stay	with	them	for	as	long	as	you	can	—	until	you	get
an	 insight,	 have	 the	urge	 to	 speak	up	 for	yourself	 to	 someone	 in	 the	 scene,	 or
until	the	feelings	change.
When	 Jane	 Ellen,	 a	 client	 of	 mine,	 did	 this	 exercise	 she	 remembered

something	that	happened	when	she	was	eleven	years	old.	She	and	her	dad	were
at	 the	mall	 shopping	 for	 school	clothes.	A	new	winter	coat	was	not	on	 the	 list
that	her	mom	had	sent	with	them,	but	Jane	Ellen	saw	one	at	Macy’s	that	she	just
had	 to	have.	She	begged	her	dad	 to	buy	her	 the	expensive	coat.	He	resisted	as
much	as	he	could,	but	eventually	he	gave	in,	and	she	got	what	she	wanted.	When
they	got	 home,	 her	mother	was	 furious	with	her	 father	 and	 told	him	 to	 take	 it
back.	 They	 had	 a	 big	 fight.	He	 refused	 to	 take	 the	 coat	 back,	 and	 her	mother
didn’t	speak	to	her	father	for	the	rest	of	the	day.
Jane	 Ellen	 learned	 that	 she	 could	 persist	 and	 get	what	 she	wanted,	 but	 that

when	she	did,	it	would	create	a	big	problem.	This	insight	helped	her	see	that	her
former	 marriage	 had	 been	 affected	 by	 this	 belief	 too.	 She	 had	 pestered	 her
boyfriend	 to	 marry	 her.	 He	 did.	 And	 the	 marriage	 was	 a	 disaster	 for	 both	 of
them.	With	a	history	like	this,	 it	was	amazing	 that	she	was	still	able	 to	ask	for
what	she	wanted,	but	she	was.	The	only	trouble	was,	it	always	turned	out	badly.
As	Jane	Ellen	went	more	deeply	into	 the	pain	surrounding	her	false	belief,	she
saw	that	she	held	 the	unconscious	expectation	 that	 if	you	ask	for	and	get	what
you	 want,	 things	 don’t	 work	 out.	 Seeing	 this	 belief,	 she	 could	 then	 begin	 to



notice	the	things	she	did	to	shoot	herself	in	the	foot	every	time	she	asked	for	and
got	what	she	wanted.	Continuing	to	notice	in	this	way	brought	consciousness	to
a	 pattern	 that	 had	 been	 unconscious	 on	 Jane	 Ellen’s	 part.	 Noticing	 what	 is,
without	praise	or	blame,	brings	light	and	energy	back	into	a	situation	and	allows
for	healing.

The	aim	of	assertion	is	not	to	get	better	at	getting	what	you
want.	Rather,	the	idea	here	is	to	speak	your	truth	so	that	you
can	see	yourself	more	fully	and	feel	yourself	more	deeply,
allowing	you	to	stay	connected	to	your	own	flow	of	energy.
Often,	when	you	do	this,	you	also	see	that	getting	what	you
want	is	not	essential	to	who	you	are.	Experiencing	your
feelings	and	expressing	yourself	are.

These	stories	show	how	asserting	wants	serves	the	goal	of	Getting	Real.	The
aim	of	 assertion	 is	not	 to	get	better	 at	getting	what	you	want.	Rather,	 the	 idea
here	 is	 to	 speak	 your	 truth	 so	 that	 you	 can	 see	 yourself	 more	 fully	 and	 feel
yourself	 more	 deeply,	 allowing	 you	 to	 stay	 connected	 to	 your	 own	 flow	 of
energy.	Often,	when	you	do	this,	you	also	see	that	getting	what	you	want	is	not
essential	to	who	you	are.	Experiencing	your	feelings	and	expressing	yourself	are.

Self-Assertion	in	Dating

Steve	had	a	history	of	rescuing	women	in	distress.	He	told	me	he	liked	being
their	“hero”	but	 that	he	 resented	how	easily	 they	could	persuade	him	 to	 spend
money	on	them.	Currently	he	was	dating	a	woman	much	younger	than	he,	a	very
pretty	woman	named	Molly,	whose	 favorite	 pastime	was	 getting	Steve	 to	 take
her	out	shopping	for	new	clothes.	He	obliged	because	he	found	her	 irresistibly
attractive	and	was	hoping	she’d	fall	in	love	with	him.	He	always	had	a	hard	time
saying	no	to	her.
One	day	when	they	were	out	together	at	the	shopping	mall,	she	saw	a	dress	in

a	 Nordstrom’s	 window	 that	 she	 had	 to	 have.	 Of	 course,	 she	 didn’t	 have	 any
money,	 so	 it	was	up	 to	Steve	 to	purchase	 it	 for	her.	When	Steve	 looked	at	 the
price,	$450,	he	knew	he	had	to	say	no.	He	was	not	a	rich	man.	He	worked	hard
for	what	he	had.	Molly,	on	the	other	hand,	didn’t	have	a	job;	she	seemed	always



able	 to	 find	 men	 to	 take	 care	 of	 her.	 She	 tried	 on	 the	 dress,	 against	 Steve’s
protests.	When	she	saw	how	well	it	fit	her,	she	begged	and	pleaded,	“You	have
to	buy	me	this.	I	have	to	have	it.	Please,	please,	please!”	Steve	rolled	his	eyes,
but	he	couldn’t	say	no.	Fortunately,	he	didn’t	say	yes	either.	He	said,	“I’ll	think
about	it,”	thus	buying	himself	some	time.
A	few	days	later,	Steve	showed	up	at	one	of	my	Getting	Real	workshops.	We

were	 doing	 some	 psychodrama	 to	 help	 the	 participants	 deal	 with	 unfinished
business.	Steve	took	a	risk	and	volunteered	to	have	us	enact	his	current	dilemma
with	 Molly.	 He	 picked	 the	 youngest	 woman	 in	 the	 room	 to	 play	 the	 role	 of
Molly,	 another	 woman	 to	 be	 the	 sales	 clerk,	 and	 a	 few	 of	 the	 men	 to	 be	 his
supportive	alter	ego.	Steve	played	himself.	His	goal	was	to	see	if	he	could	stand
up	for	himself	in	the	face	of	Molly’s	demands.	The	woman	playing	Molly	did	a
great	 job	 pressuring	 him	 to	 give	 her	 what	 she	 wanted.	 He	 stammered	 and
stuttered,	but	he	could	not	get	 the	word	no	 to	come	out	of	his	mouth.	After	he
had	 tried	 to	 assert	 himself	 for	 a	 while	 without	 success,	 I	 asked	 another	 man,
Carlos,	 to	 try	 being	 Steve	 for	 a	 few	minutes.	 As	 Steve,	 Carlos	 had	 the	 same
trouble.	This	 helped	Steve	 feel	 that	 he	wasn’t	 alone	 and	 seemed	 to	 bolster	 his
confidence.	Then	I	asked	Steve	to	be	a	coach	for	Carlos	and	to	tell	him	exactly
what	to	say	to	end	the	conversation	with	Molly	about	the	dress.	Steve	whispered
in	Carlos’s	ear:	“Say	to	her,	’I’m	not	buying	that	dress.’	Don’t	explain.	Just	say
that.	No	matter	what	she	says,	just	repeat	‘I’m	not	buying	that	dress!’”
Carlos	did	as	Steve	suggested,	as	Steve	and	the	others	cheered	him	on.	Then	it

was	Steve’s	 turn	to	step	back	into	the	line	of	fire.	This	 time,	he	seemed	bigger
and	more	confident.	When	Molly	pleaded,	he	said	firmly,	“I’m	not	buying	that
dress.”	When	she	begged,	he	said,	“I’m	not	buying	that	dress!”	Finally,	she	gave
up.	Steve	got	 a	 big	 round	of	 applause.	And	 as	he	walked	off	 stage,	 he	 looked
each	of	us	in	the	eye	in	turn	and	repeated	with	a	sense	of	obvious	delight,	“I’m
not	 buying	 that	 dress!”	Later	 in	 the	 group	we	 did	 some	work	 that	 revealed	 to
Steve	 his	 unconscious	 belief	 that	 if	 he	 didn’t	 buy	 people’s	 friendship	 no	 one
would	want	 to	be	with	him.	This	core	belief	was	easier	 to	access	once	he	had
some	 sense	 of	 personal	 power.	 It	was	 as	 if	 he	 didn’t	 need	 such	 rigid	 defenses
now	that	he	had	more	access	to	his	real	self.
Steve	later	reported	that	he	did	tell	Molly	his	decision	and	that	soon	afterward,

he	stopped	seeing	her	—	at	his	choosing.	He	says	he	values	 the	 time	he	 spent
with	her,	because	it	drove	home	to	him	how	unassertive	he	had	always	been	and
the	price	he	paid	for	this	pattern	in	terms	of	his	own	aliveness.	He	told	me	he’ll
never	 forget	how	alive	he	 felt	 that	day	 in	 the	group	 just	 saying	over	and	over,



“I’m	 not	 buying	 that	 dress!”	 I	 won’t	 forget	 either.	 He	 looked	 so	 free	 and	 so
happy.
If	you	have	difficulty	saying	no,	remember	that	expressing	a	no	in	the	moment

says	nothing	about	how	you	will	feel	tomorrow.	It	says	nothing	about	the	kind	of
person	you	are.	It	does	not	mean	you	are	tight	or	selfish.	It	doesn’t	mean	people
won’t	 like	 you.	 It	 doesn’t	 mean	 anything	 in	 particular.	 You	 give	 an	 event
meaning	according	 to	your	beliefs	and	 fears	—	most	of	which	are	conditioned
reactions	to	some	distant	childhood	event.	Steve,	for	example,	had	acquired	the
false	belief	 that	 if	 he	didn’t	buy	people’s	 friendship,	no	one	would	want	 to	be
with	him.	He	got	over	that	belief	once	he	saw	it	clearly	and	started	testing	it	out
in	reality.
By	 emphasizing	 that	 your	 feelings	 and	 your	 foreground	 continually	 change,

especially	 after	 honest	 self-expression,	 I	 hope	 you	will	 find	 it	 easier	 to	 assert
your	“don’t	wants”	without	feeling	it’s	a	big	deal.	If	you’re	afraid	that	the	other
person	is	going	to	make	a	big	deal	out	of	it,	share	that	fear	along	with	your	no.
We’ll	 get	 into	 this	 truth	 skill	 more	 fully	 in	 chapter	 10,	 “Sharing	 Mixed
Emotions.”

The	Curious	Child	Exercise

In	workshops,	I	often	ask	people	to	pair	up	and	practice	asserting	boundaries
with	regard	to	their	personal	space.	Partner	A	is	instructed	to	take	the	attitude	of
an	innocent,	curious	child	whose	intent	it	is	to	discover	all	she	can	about	Partner
B,	nonverbally,	through	vision	and	touch.	Partner	B	is	instructed	to	notice	which
of	A’s	explorations	feel	okay	and	which	feel	out	of	bounds.	Partner	B	then	tells
Partner	A	what	does	not	feel	okay	and	what	B	wants	A	to	do	(stop,	do	it	more
gently,	more	firmly,	and	so	on).	Then	they	switch	roles.	Afterward	we	all	discuss
how	easy	or	difficult	is	was	to	verbally	assert	our	boundaries.
Try	this	exercise	with	someone	you	know,	first	as	the	curious	child	and	then	as

the	object	of	the	child’s	curiosity.	When	you	are	the	curious	child,	what	do	you
want	 to	 do	 but	 refrain	 from	 doing?	Do	 you	 notice	 beliefs	 that	 certain	 actions
would	be	too	intrusive?	What	risks	do	you	take?	Do	you	trust	the	other	to	assert
her	boundaries	or	do	you	notice	yourself	caretaking?	When	you’re	 in	 the	other
role	and	someone	is	poking	around	your	body	or	looking	at	you	up	close,	what
do	 you	 feel?	 What	 beliefs	 do	 you	 notice?	 What	 is	 your	 self-talk?	 What
judgments	 about	 yourself	 or	 the	 other	 come	 into	 your	mind?	Do	you	 say	 stop



when	you	feel	like	it,	or	do	you	try	to	be	more	accommodating	than	you	really
feel?
The	 two	 most	 important	 skills	 needed	 for	 marking	 your	 boundaries	 are

assertiveness	and	the	ability	to	express	anger	or	resentment.	If	you	have	asserted
yourself	 and	 the	 other	 person	 doesn’t	 seem	 to	 hear	 or	 respect	 you,	 then	 anger
might	 be	 an	 honest	 response	 to	 the	 situation.	 Expressing	 anger	 communicates
that	you	feel	strongly	about	it.	It	says	you	respect	yourself	enough	to	stand	up	for
yourself.

Asserting	Leads	to	Intimacy

Anger	 and	 resentment,	 even	 irrational	 resentment,	 are	 valuable	 bits	 of
information	about	your	feelings.	They	help	you	see	yourself,	and	they	help	you
be	seen.	They	are	also	ways	of	making	strong	contact	with	another	person	when
the	 two	 of	 you	 have	 fallen	 into	 the	 habit	 of	 being	 too	 “nicey-nice.”	 And
remember,	you	are	simply	expressing	your	anger.	 It	 is	your	honest	 response	 to
the	situation.	You	are	not	saying	the	other	is	wrong	or	bad.
If	 you	 desire	 intimacy	with	 the	 people	 in	 your	 life,	 you	 need	 to	 include	 all

varieties	of	strong	contact	in	your	expressive	repertoire,	not	just	the	nice,	sweet
kind.	Remember	 that	 people	 tend	 to	be	 self-absorbed	much	of	 the	 time.	Don’t
waste	 your	 energy	 wishing	 this	 were	 not	 the	 case.	 It’s	 what	 is.	 Other	 people
sometimes	need	you	to	wake	them	up	to	the	fact	that	there’s	another	person	here
with	needs	that	are	different	from	theirs.	They	may	need	to	hear	a	strong,	clear
expression	 of	 what’s	 okay	 and	 not	 okay	 with	 you.	 Don’t	 be	 afraid	 to	 get	 in
people’s	faces	when	you	want	their	attention.	If	you	hint	around,	wait	for	them	to
notice	 you,	 and	 then	 resent	 them	 when	 they	 don’t,	 you	 are	 operating	 from	 a
naive	picture	of	how	most	human	beings	are.	It’s	not	that	others	intend	you	any
harm.	It’s	just	that	most	people	aren’t	very	good	at	anticipating	your	needs.

If	you	desire	intimacy	with	the	people	in	your	life,	you	need	to
include	all	varieties	of	strong	contact	in	your	expressive
repertoire,	not	just	the	nice,	sweet	kind.	Remember	that
people	tend	to	be	self-absorbed	much	of	the	time.	Sometimes
[they]	need	you	to	wake	them	up	to	the	fact	that	there’s
another	person	here	with	needs	that	are	different	from	theirs.



Asserting	 yourself	 can	 stimulate	 the	 other	 person	 involved	 to	 stretch	 his
boundaries.	As	 I	became	more	assertive	with	my	husband,	he	actually	 thanked
me	 for	doing	 so,	because	 sometimes	when	he	 tried	 to	give	me	what	 I	wanted,
he’d	find	that	he	could	give	it	and	that	it	felt	good.	He	found,	for	example,	that
he	enjoyed	social	gatherings	much	more	than	he	thought	he	would.
When	 asserting	 your	 desires,	 you’re	 going	 to	 bump	 up	 against	 the	 other

person’s	 boundaries.	 You	 might	 even	 push	 some	 buttons	 along	 the	 way.	 By
bumping	against	her	with	your	 request,	you’re	“calling	her	out,”	you’re	asking
her	 to	 be	 more	 than	 her	 limited	 view	 of	 herself.	 Or	 you	 may	 be	 giving	 her
practice	holding	her	ground.	Either	way,	it’s	not	going	to	do	her	any	real	harm.
And	it	just	might	help.

Asserting	Lets	You	Use	Your	Imagination

One	of	my	main	beefs	with	all	the	self-assertion	language	is	that	it	can	be	so
drab.	 I	get	bored	with	all	 the	programmed	ways	of	 saying	 things,	even	 though
that’s	 what	 I’m	 recommending	 in	 many	 of	 the	 practices	 I	 teach.	 So	 it’s	 a
dilemma	 for	 me:	 how	 to	 be	 disciplined	 in	 my	 language	 so	 that	 it	 supports
awareness	and	responsibility	and	at	the	same	time	how	not	to	sound	like	a	robot.
I’m	 still	 grappling	with	 this	 issue.	But	 at	 least	where	 assertion	 is	 concerned,	 I
think	 I’ve	 come	 up	with	 a	 partial	 solution.	When	 you	 ask	 for	what	 you	want,
paint	a	picture	for	the	other	person,	giving	as	much	detail	as	you	can	about	what
you	want	and	what	vision	 this	serves.	When	he	can	see	and	sense	what	you’re
getting	at	and	maybe	put	himself	into	the	picture,	then	your	assertion	has	some
originality	and	beauty.	Throughout	these	pages,	I	have	encouraged	you	to	offer
specific	details	of	what	you	actually	experienced	or	are	experiencing.	Nowhere
is	this	more	important	than	in	the	area	of	asserting	yourself.	Being	specific	also
puts	you	into	the	picture,	thus	deepening	your	felt	sense	of	your	desires.	It	makes
things	feel	more	up	close	and	personal.	When	you	actually	see	and	feel	yourself
in	the	picture,	you	might	see	that	what	you	think	you	want	isn’t	exactly	what	you
want,	or	you	may	see	that	you	can’t	accept	not	getting	it.
In	some	of	my	couples	weekend	workshops,	I	ask	participants	to	write	a	piece

of	pulp	nonfiction	about	their	ideal	sexual	encounter	with	their	mate.	We	do	this
exercise	 on	 Saturday	 evening.	 All	 the	 participants	 take	 some	 time	 alone	 to
envision	 how	 they	 really	 desire	 to	 be	 loved,	 from	 foreplay	 to	 afterglow.	 Then
they	write	out	their	ideal	encounter	in	exquisite	detail,	as	if	they	were	writing	a



romance	novel.	Later	that	evening,	back	in	their	rooms,	they	read	what	they’ve
written	out	loud	to	their	partner.	The	next	morning,	we	hear	the	reports	of	what
these	 sharings	 led	 to	—	 like	 acting	 out	 each	 other’s	 fantasies	 or	 talking	 about
what’s	blocking	them.	Sometimes	a	few	people	will	read	their	erotic	writings	to
the	entire	group.	I	wish	I’d	kept	one	or	two	of	these	to	share	with	you.	But	I’m
sure	your	imagination	contains	plenty	of	erotic	material	of	its	own!

The	Yes-No	Exercise

Many	people	seem	to	get	a	lump	in	their	throat	any	time	they	need	to	say	no.
Or	 they	 feel	 timid	about	bluntly	 refusing	any	 request.	A	bioenergetics	exercise
comes	in	handy	on	such	occasions.	In	this	exercise,	people	pair	up.	Partner	B	is
instructed	to	say	no	and	hold	her	ground	no	matter	how	seductive	or	threatening
Partner	A	becomes.	A	is	instructed	to	say	yes	to	B	in	an	effort	to	get	B	to	change
her	mind	from	no	to	yes.	And	so	it	goes:	A	says	yes	and	B	says	no	in	response.	A
uses	every	 tactic	he	knows,	within	 the	 limits	of	 the	 instructions,	 to	 try	 to	get	a
yes	out	of	B.	During	the	exercise,	most	people	begin	to	project	onto	the	situation
some	 familiar	 issue	 from	 their	 past	 or	 present	 life.	 B’s	 nos	 come	 to	 stand	 for
something	she	has	really	been	trying	to	stand	up	against.	Person	A’s	yeses	come
to	 stand	 for	 something	 he	 wants	 and	 can’t	 seem	 to	 get.	 People	 become	 very
energized	by	this	simple	exercise.	The	yeses	and	nos	get	louder	and	sound	more
genuine	as	the	activity	progresses.
This	exercise	shows	many	people	how	difficult	it	is	to	say	no	while	standing

tall,	 looking	 in	 the	 other’s	 eyes,	 with	 their	 feet	 firmly	 on	 the	 ground.	 They
discover	all	kinds	of	little	self-negating	mannerisms	that	undermine	their	ability
to	be	 taken	seriously.	As	I	was	working	with	one	woman	using	 this	exercise,	 I
asked	her	 to	 listen	 to	her	voice	as	 she	 said	no.	When	she	did,	 she	was	able	 to
hear	her	pleading	 tone.	She	was	 saying	no	 in	a	way	 that	 seemed	 to	be	 saying,
“Please,	please	don’t	ask	me	 for	 that.	You	know	I	can’t	 say	no.”	She	admitted
that	she	was	trying	to	get	the	other	person	to	change	so	she	wouldn’t	have	to	face
her	fear	of	disappointing	him.

Is	Your	Assertion	Style	a	Control	Pattern?

My	friend	Mara	has	a	patterned	way	of	asking	for	what	she	wants.	Whenever
she	wants	my	participation	in	something,	she’ll	say,	“You	could	help	me	with	my



x	(something	she	wants),	and	I’ll	do	y	for	you	(usually	something	I	don’t	want
and	have	never	given	her	any	indication	that	I	want).	That’s	it.	Then	she	assumes
it’s	agreed,	and	the	next	time	she	brings	the	matter	up,	she	says,	“When	do	you
want	 to	 come	over	 and	help	me	with	 x?”	 I	 have	 talked	with	 her	 about	what	 I
notice	 and	 feel,	 and	 she	 recognizes	 what	 she	 does	 as	 a	 control	 pattern.
Apparently,	 this	 pattern	 stems	 from	her	 fear	 of	 hearing	 that	 someone	does	 not
want	 to	give	her	what	she	wants	and	a	belief	 that	a	direct	 refusal	will	hurt	 too
much	(like	it	did	when	she	was	a	child).	So	she	never	asks	that	question.	She’s
found	a	way	around	it.	But	of	course,	her	way	doesn’t	work	too	well	either	for
her	or	 for	 the	other	person.	Whether	or	not	you	 think	you	have	problems	with
asserting	yourself,	pay	attention	for	a	while	to	how	you	ask	for	what	you	want.
It’s	a	good	way	to	become	aware	of	your	self-protective	patterns.

A	Complaint	Is	a	Want	in	Disguise

Another	 patterned	 way	 of	 asking	 for	 what	 you	 want	 is	 to	 complain,	 as	 in,
“Why	don’t	we	ever	sit	by	the	fire	and	just	be	quiet	together?”	When	you	hear	a
complaint,	 how	do	 you	 feel?	And	when	 you	 speak	 one,	 how	does	 that	 feel?	 I
think	 most	 complaints	 are	 a	 cop-out.	 You’re	 afraid	 to	 ask	 directly,	 so	 you
complain	 about	 never	 doing	 something	 instead	 of	 simply	 asking	 to	 do	 it.
Complaints	also	contain	a	strained,	tense	energy,	which	makes	you	less	likely	to
get	what	you	want	because	you’re	not	in	harmony	with	your	own	energy	flow.
Whenever	you	hear	yourself	complaining,	see	 if	you	can	discover	 the	desire

that’s	hiding	underneath	 the	complaint:	 “I	want	 to	 sit	by	 the	 fire	with	you	and
just	be	silent	together.”	Big	difference,	huh?	Likewise,	if	someone	complains	to
you,	see	if	you	can	make	the	translation,	as	in,	“So,	I	hear	you	say	‘why	don’t	we
ever	sit	by	the	fire,’	and	I’m	imagining	you	want	to	sit	by	the	fire.	Is	that	so?”	As
a	general	rule,	use	I	messages	in	your	assertions.	They	are	a	lot	easier	to	listen	to
than	you-should	messages.	Using	 these	kinds	of	messages	affirms	 that	you	are
taking	 responsibility	 for	what	 you	want,	whereas	 you-should	 or	why-don’t-we
messages	shift	responsibility	onto	someone	else.

You	Don’t	Have	to	Answer	Every	Question

One	very	common	and	important	situation	in	which	you	may	feel	like	saying
no	is	when	someone	asks	you	to	answer	a	question	about	something	you	don’t



wish	to	talk	about	at	that	moment.	When	this	happens,	give	yourself	permission
to	tell	him	so.	Sometimes	you	won’t	even	realize	until	you’ve	already	answered,
that	you	have	been	inauthentic.	If	this	happens,	one	way	to	deal	with	it	is	to	“go
out	and	come	in	again,”	which	we’ll	discuss	further	in	chapter	8.	Tell	the	other
that	 although	you	 did	 answer	 his	 question,	 you	 now	 realize	 that	 you	were	 not
being	genuine	and	that	if	you	had	it	to	do	over	again,	you	would	have	told	him,
“I	don’t	feel	like	talking	about	that	at	this	time.”	If	this	kind	of	asserting	sounds
difficult,	rest	assured	that	it	gets	easier	with	practice.	Remember,	if	other	people
become	upset,	you	are	not	to	blame.	In	time,	you’ll	get	more	comfortable	about
other	people’s	discomfort	with	your	actions.	After	all,	one	of	 the	objectives	of
Getting	Real	is	to	stop	taking	other	people’s	reactions	personally.

One	of	 the	objectives	of	Getting	Real	 is	 to	 stop	 taking	other
people’s	reactions	personally.

Asserting	Wants	and	Don’t	Wants	in	a	Nutshell

•	When	asking	for	what	you	want,	use	I	messages,	not	you-should	messages.
•	Use	concrete,	specific	language.
•	Say	what	you	want,	not	what	you	don’t	want.	Asserting	what	you	do	want	is
a	bigger	commitment	for	you,	and	it’s	easier	for	the	other	to	take	in.

•	Express	your	wants	even	if	you	have	little	chance	of	getting	what	you’re
asking	for.	Asserting	is	like	other	forms	of	self-expression	—	it	keeps	your
energy	moving	instead	of	getting	stuck	in	protective	patterns.	Experiencing
your	feelings	and	expressing	yourself	are	essential.	The	results	are	less
important.

•	To	become	aware	of	any	false	beliefs	about	asserting	yourself	that	you	may
have	acquired	in	childhood,	check	to	see	if	you	have	any	painful	childhood
memories	associated	with	asking	for	what	you	want.	False	beliefs	create
bottlenecks;	your	energy	gets	constricted	or	stuck.	Self-expression	helps	to
free	up	the	blockage.

•	Many	people	have	a	patterned	way	of	asking	for	what	they	want.	Notice	how
you	ask	for	things.	Are	you	avoiding	discomfort	—	yours	or	another’s	—
with	these	patterns?



•	When	saying	what	you	want,	practice	painting	a	picture	with	your	words	and
putting	yourself	and	the	other	in	that	picture.	Doing	this	helps	you	to	be
specific.	Also,	your	wants	sound	more	appealing	to	the	other	person,	and
you	have	the	chance	to	use	your	very	fertile	imagination.



CHAPTER	7
TAKING	BACK	PROJECTIONS

DISCOVERING	YOUR
OTHER	SIDE

Matthew	was	a	thirty-six-year-old	computer	technician	working	in	a	large	high-
tech	company.	He	couldn’t	stand	his	boss,	Ray,	whom	he	found	overcontrolling
and	disrespectful.	His	common	complaint	was:	“Why	can’t	Ray	just	give	me	an
assignment	and	trust	me?	I	can’t	stand	all	his	micromanagement!”
Matthew	 had	 grown	 up	 in	 an	 achievement-oriented	 family,	 the	 youngest	 of

three	 sons.	 During	 his	 early	 school	 years,	 he	 felt	 he	 was	 constantly	 being
compared	to	his	two	very	intelligent	older	brothers	by	his	teachers	as	well	as	by
his	parents.	Believing	there	was	no	way	he	could	match	their	accomplishments,
he	 withdrew	 his	 energies	 from	 school	 and	 put	 them	 into	 tinkering	 with
mechanical	 things.	 His	 parents	 failed	 to	 see	 the	 value	 in	 his	 tinkering	 and
frequently	 pressured	 him	 to	 do	 his	 homework	 and	 his	 chores.	 The	more	 they
pressured	him,	the	more	he	procrastinated.	Matthew	learned	that	the	best	way	to
deal	with	 people	 in	 authority	was	 to	 act	 like	 you’re	 listening	 and	 then	 just	 do
whatever	 you	 want.	 Thus	 began	 Matthew’s	 pattern	 of	 disowning	 his	 inner
authority	and	rebelling	against	outer	directives,	often	unconsciously,	by	screwing
up.
Matthew	hated	Ray’s	micromanagment,	but	he	was	also	rebelling	against	his

own	inner	micromanager.	After	noticing	that	he	always	reacted	to	people	telling
him	what	 to	 do	 and	 how	 to	 do	 it	 and	 that	 he	was	 always	 thinking	 about	 how
these	people	shouldn’t	 treat	him	this	way,	he	recognized	that	 the	outer	struggle
with	authorities	was	a	mirror	of	his	inner	struggle.	Noticing	his	highly	charged
should	 directed	 at	 Ray	 got	 him	 looking	 at	 how	 he	 himself	 has	 an	 oppressive,
overcontrolling	inner	voice	that	can’t	just	let	him	be.	“It’s	like	I	have	my	dad’s
voice	 inside	my	own	head:	 ‘You	 should’ve	helped	Cindy	with	 the	dishes.	Did
you	fill	out	 that	 job	application?	Why	don’t	you	make	a	 list	so	you	don’t	keep



forgetting	 things?’”	 Listening	 to	 this	 inner	 voice	 while	 growing	 up	 made
Matthew	feel	smaller	and	smaller.
The	awareness	 that	he	was	disowning	his	 inner	authority	and	sabotaging	his

own	directives	was	an	 important	step.	This	kind	of	awareness	 is	often	 the	 first
step	 in	 taking	 back	 projections	 that	 you	 have	 put	 on	 others	—	noticing	 that	 a
pattern	has	been	triggered	and	realizing	that	you’re	really	fighting	with	yourself.
I’ll	 take	 you	 through	 the	 other	 steps	 later	 in	 this	 chapter,	 but	 first	 I	 want	 to
present	a	more	general	look	at	truth	skill	#6,	taking	back	projections.

Human	 beings	 are	 like	 walking,	 talking	 projectors.
Everywhere	 we	 go	 we	 see	 things	 “out	 there”	 that	 really
originate	 inside	 us.	 If	 you’re	 upset	 that	 your	 mate	 doesn’t
listen	to	you,	take	a	look	at	yourself:	How	well	do	you	listen	to
yourself?

The	Outer	Struggle	Mirrors	the	Inner

Human	beings	are	like	walking,	talking	projectors.	Everywhere	we	go	we	see
things	“out	there”	that	really	originate	inside	us.	If	you’re	upset	that	your	mate
doesn’t	listen	to	you,	take	a	look	at	yourself:	how	well	do	you	listen	to	yourself?
If	 you	 and	 your	 business	 partner	 are	 disagreeing	 over	 whether	 to	 take	 a	 big
financial	risk	or	to	be	more	cautious,	take	a	look	inside.	You	may	have	a	long-
standing	inner	conflict	around	taking	risks	as	opposed	to	playing	it	safe.
Our	inner	conflicts	are	usually	unconscious.	Thus,	when	we	project	our	inner

struggles	onto	others,	communication	can	become	pretty	dicey.	You	think	you’re
talking	to	another	when	you’re	really	talking	to	yourself!	Until	Matthew	became
conscious	of	how	his	relationship	with	Ray	is	a	replay	of	a	control	battle	within
himself,	for	example,	their	interactions	were	inauthentic.

Our	 inner	 conflicts	 are	 usually	 unconscious.	 Thus,	when	we
project	 our	 inner	 struggles	 onto	 others,	 communication	 can
become	pretty	dicey.



’Fessing	Up

Sally	harbors	unconscious	anger	at	men,	but	she	can’t	accept	these	feelings	in
herself.	Instead,	she	gets	judgmental	or	critical	whenever	she	hears	other	women
making	 derogatory	 comments	 about	men.	 She	 tells	 her	 friend,	 “You	 shouldn’t
put	men	down	like	that.	Have	some	compassion!”	The	first	step	in	owning	that
projection	is	for	Sally	to	notice	that	she	has	a	judgment	about	how	someone	else
should	be.	This	awareness	can	be	used	as	the	basis	for	a	hypothesis:	maybe	if	I
have	a	“should”	about	someone	else,	it’s	a	signal	that	I	have	unresolved	feelings
about	the	same	issue.	The	most	real	response	would	be	for	Sally	to	express	her
judgment	as	a	revelation	about	herself,	not	a	pronouncement	about	the	other.	For
example,	she	might	disclose,	“I	notice	I’m	having	some	judgmental	self-talk	that
you	shouldn’t	be	so	critical	of	men.”	In	this	way,	she	takes	responsibility	for	the
fact	 that	 she	 is	 feeling	 judgmental.	 Speaking	 about	 it	 this	 way	 helps	 her	 stop
identifying	with	 her	 judgment	 as	 the	 truth	 about	 her	 friend.	 I	 know	 that	when
someone	has	a	judgment	about	me,	it’s	a	lot	easier	to	listen	to	it	and	not	react	to
it	 if	 she	 owns	 it	 as	 her	 judgment	 by	 using	 the	 phrase,	 “I	 notice	 I’m	 having	 a
judgment”	or	“I’m	having	a	judgmental	thought.”
As	I’ve	said	earlier,	being	judgmental	is	a	control	pattern.	It	is	one	of	the	ego-

mind’s	 many	 automatic	 ways	 of	 dealing	 with	 inner	 conflict,	 pain,	 or	 anxiety.
Noticing	your	control	patterns,	and	coming	to	know	their	structure	and	function,
helps	you	disidentify	from	them.	These	patterns	do	not	define	who	you	are,	but
they	can	serve	as	useful	signposts	pointing	how	you	avoid	the	truth	of	who	you
are.
If	we	find	ourselves	projecting,	then	we	can	take	it	as	an	opportunity	to	learn.

The	 truth	 is,	we	 often	 need	 others	 to	 push	 our	 buttons	 before	we	 can	 become
aware	of	what	our	buttons	are.	Taking	this	kind	of	look	at	ourselves	can	be	very
humbling.	That’s	 the	 idea	—	to	become	more	humble	about	our	 righteousness.
And	 noticing	 our	 projections	 helps	 us	 do	 this.	 So	 the	 first	 step	 in	 getting	 real
with	 your	 projections	 (that	 is,	 taking	 responsibility	 for	 them	 as	 yours)	 is	 to
communicate	whatever	you	are	aware	of	in	the	moment,	even	if	you	suspect	that
you	may	 be	 projecting	 your	 unresolved	 inner	 conflicts	 onto	 the	 other	 person.
Express	 a	 resentment,	 a	 judgment,	 or	 even	 an	 interpretation,	 if	 that’s	 what’s
coming	up	for	you.
Don’t	 try	 to	be	 totally	accurate	about	what’s	 real.	That	would	be	a	hopeless

task,	 given	 the	 number	 of	 unconscious	 control	 patterns	 most	 of	 us	 have.



Sometimes	you’ll	need	 to	 just	 say	what’s	 in	your	 foreground,	keeping	 in	mind
that	there’s	a	good	chance	you	are	projecting.	Trust	that	after	you	have	done	this,
especially	if	you	do	it	with	awareness	of	what	you	experience	in	your	body,	you
may	 notice	 that	 you	 are	 hearing	 or	 seeing	 yourself	more	 clearly.	 If	 you	 really
sense	what’s	going	on	in	your	body	and	you	really	listen	to	your	voice,	you	are
likely	to	notice	that	you	have	been	triggered	—	which	probably	means	you	are
not	able	to	be	objective	about	the	issue.	In	other	words,	you	are	projecting.	Once
you	 recognize	 that	 you	 have	 been	 projecting,	 then	 you	 can	 communicate	 that
awareness	and	perhaps	clean	up	any	messes	you	might	have	made.

If	 you	 really	 sense	 what’s	 going	 on	 in	 your	 body	 and	 you
really	 listen	 to	 your	 voice,	 you	 are	 likely	 to	 notice	 that	 you
have	 been	 triggered	—	 which	 probably	 means	 you	 are	 not
able	to	be	objective	about	the	issue.

Distinguishing	Interpretations	from	Actual	Behavior

We	need	 to	clean	up	our	 language	 if	we	want	 to	Get	Real	and	see	 things	as
they	 are.	 The	 mechanism	 of	 projection	 leads	 us	 to	 speak	 in	 ways	 that	 create
confusion	between	 reality	and	 interpretation.	An	 interpretation	 like,	 “I	 see	you
are	 feeling	 insecure”	 may	 be	 a	 projection.	 You	 do	 not	 see	 that	 someone	 is
insecure.	You	interpret	this.	The	statement	is	not	based	on	your	actual	experience
of	 the	other	person.	You	may	 see	 a	 certain	 expression	 in	his	 eyes,	which	your
mind	associates	with	insecurity.	Or	you	may	see	him	doing	something	that	you
tend	to	do	when	you	are	feeling	insecure.	But	you	do	not	see	his	insecurity.	You
can	express	these	things	in	a	way	that	keeps	you	in	your	experience.	You	could
say,	 “I	 see	 you	 looking	 at	 the	 floor	 as	 you	 talk,	 and	 I	 imagine	 you’re	 feeling
insecure.”	 Making	 the	 clear	 distinction	 between	 what	 you	 see	 and	 what	 you
imagine	helps	you	get	used	to	living	with	the	anxiety	that	you	cannot	know	for
sure	what	the	other	person	feels.	It	 is	also	a	way	of	using	language	that	fosters
owning	your	projections.

We	 often	 need	 others	 to	 push	 our	 buttons	 before	 we	 can
become	 aware	 of	 what	 our	 buttons	 are.	 Taking	 this	 kind	 of



look	at	ourselves	can	be	very	humbling.	That’s	the	idea	—	to
become	more	humble	about	our	 righteousness.	And	noticing
our	projections	helps	us	do	this.

Self-Assessment	Quiz

To	 take	 stock	 of	 your	 tendency	 to	 take	 on	 others’	 projections	 or	 to	 project
blame,	responsibility,	hidden	motives,	or	shoulds	onto	others,	take	the	following
quiz.	 Give	 yourself	 a	 1	 if	 the	 statement	 is	 rarely	 true	 of	 you,	 2	 or	 3	 if	 it	 is
sometimes	true,	and	4	or	5	if	it	is	generally	true.

1.	When	I	listen	to	people,	I	spend	a	lot	of	the	time	making	interpretations
about	what	they	really	mean	or	about	their	unspoken	agendas.

2.	I	often	feel	that	I	know	what	would	be	good	for	other	people	better	than	they
do.

3.	When	something	goes	wrong,	I	want	to	find	out	whose	fault	it	is.
4.	I	think	a	lot	about	how	others	should	be	or	how	they	should	treat	me.
5.	When	I	tell	someone	he	has	done	something	that	pushed	my	button,	I	expect
him	to	stop	the	behavior.

6.	When	someone	tells	me	how	I	should	or	shouldn’t	be,	I	often	start	beating
up	on	myself.

If	you	scored	several	3’s,	4’s,	and	5’s,	you	probably	focus	too	much	on	other
people,	on	how	they	should	be	and	how	they	view	you.	Doing	so	could	be	a	way
of	avoiding	taking	responsibility	for	yourself	and	the	fact	that	your	inner	state	is
your	responsibility,	not	someone	else’s.

Meeting	Yourself	in	the	Mirror

Think	of	a	person	whose	behavior	bothers	you	in	some	way.	Give	the	behavior
a	 label,	 such	 as	 angry,	 controlling,	wishy-washy,	 boring,	 self-centered,	 and	 so
forth.	Now	try	on	 the	hypothesis	 that	 the	other’s	behavior	 reflects	an	aspect	of
you	or	your	 life	 that	you	have	not	come	 to	 terms	with.	Let’s	 say	you	said	 that
selfish	 people	 bug	 you.	 This	 statement	 most	 likely	 signals	 that	 you	 are	 not
comfortable	 with	 your	 own	 selfish	 side	 in	 some	 way.	 Perhaps	 you	 are	 more



selfish	than	you	are	aware	of;	or	maybe	you	need	to	become	more	affirming	of
your	own	needs.	Try	looking	at	selfishness	as	a	way	of	behaving	that	you	either
over-	or	underlearned.
In	my	case,	 I	have	a	button	 that	gets	pushed	by	other	people’s	anger	 toward

me.	When	I	was	a	child,	my	dad	tended	to	react	with	anger	to	what	I	considered
minor	frustrations	—	like	the	slowness	of	his	employees	or	minor	mistakes	my
brothers	 and	 I	 would	make.	 I	 felt	 powerless	 to	 change	 him,	 so	 I	 developed	 a
control	pattern	of	judging	him	for	his	lack	of	tolerance.	Now,	as	an	adult,	I	notice
myself	being	both	attracted	to	and	bothered	by	men	who	“pop	off”	easily.	These
men	serve	as	my	mirror.	They	have	overlearned	something	that	I	underlearned,
since	I	avoided	expressing	irritations	as	a	youngster	(heaven	forbid	I	should	be
anything	like	my	dad!).	I	need	these	kinds	of	people	in	my	life	to	help	me	see	my
own	anger,	my	shadow,	the	hidden	aspect	of	myself	that	I	can	only	see	by	first
noticing	that	I	judge	it	in	others.

So	 if	 you	 said,	 “If	 only	 you	 would	 look	 at	 me	 when	 I’m
speaking,	I’d	feel	connected	to	you,”	“feeling	connected”	is	an
experience	 that	 you	 long	 to	 have.	 Something	 inside	 you	 is
getting	in	the	way	of	your	feeling	connected.

“If	Only”	Exercise

Think	of	 someone	you	are	emotionally	 involved	with.	Reflect	on	 something
you	wish	this	person	would	do	to	help	you	feel	better.	Use	the	sentence,	“If	only
you	would___,	I’d	feel___.	Examples	might	be,	“If	only	you	would	tell	me	you
love	me,	I’d	feel	safe,”	“If	only	you	would	stop	telling	me	how	to	do	things,	I’d
feel	 energized	 about	 getting	 things	 done,”	 or	 “If	 only	 you	 would	 look	 at	 me
when	I	talk	to	you,	I’d	feel	connected	to	you.”
Look	 at	what	 you	have	written	 after	 the	words	 “I’d	 feel.”	Whatever	 you’ve

written,	 it	 indicates	 that	you	 long	 to	 feel	 this	emotion	but	are	having	difficulty
experiencing	it.	Something	internal	is	blocking	you,	and	you	have	projected	this
block	onto	 the	other.	So	 if	you	said,	“If	only	you	would	 look	at	me	when	 I’m
speaking,	 I’d	 feel	connected	 to	you,”	“feeling	connected”	 is	an	experience	 that
you	 long	 to	 have.	 Something	 inside	 you	 is	 getting	 in	 the	way	 of	 your	 feeling
connected.	 Whether	 or	 not	 you	 feel	 connected	 is	 not	 the	 other	 person’s



responsibility	—	it’s	yours.	It	may	make	it	easier	for	you	to	feel	connected	when
she	looks	at	you,	but	it	is	not	she	who	needs	to	change.
You	can	use	your	awareness	of	this	projection	to	communicate	your	wants	in	a

way	 that	 is	 real	 and	 transparent,	 a	 way	 that	 takes	 responsibility	 for	 what	 you
want	 instead	of	wishing	 the	other	person	would	do	 just	 the	 right	 thing	 to	help
you	get	it.	Own	up	to	the	fact	that	“feeling	connected”	is	hard	for	you	and	that
you	 want	 her	 help.	 Asking	 for	 help	 is	 quite	 different	 from	 holding	 another
responsible.	By	asking	for	help,	you	are	actually	taking	responsibility	for	the	fact
that	it’s	hard	for	you	to	do	something	on	your	own.	Here’s	how	you	could	state
it:	 “I’m	having	difficulty	 feeling	 connected	 to	 you.	 I	want	 your	 help.	 If	 you’d
look	at	me	when	I’m	speaking,	 that	would	give	me	a	boost	 toward	getting	that
feeling	of	connection	that	I	 long	for.”	Owning	your	projection	of	responsibility
in	 this	 way	 removes	 the	 tension	 or	 static	 in	 the	 energy	 flow	 between	 you,
opening	 the	 way	 for	 more	 authentic	 relating.	 Another	 way	 to	 take	 back	 your
projection	 is	 to	do	 for	her	what	you	are	asking	her	 to	do	 for	you.	Look	at	her
when	you	speak,	instead	of	worrying	about	whether	she	is	looking	at	you.	Take
responsibility	 for	 helping	 yourself	 feel	 connected.	 In	 this	 way,	 you	 may	 also
serve	as	her	model.

Asking	 for	 help	 is	 quite	 different	 from	 holding	 another
responsible.	 By	 asking	 for	 help,	 you	 are	 actually	 taking
responsibility	 for	 the	 fact	 that	 it’s	 hard	 for	 you	 to	 do
something	on	your	own.

We	 all	 project,	 just	 like	 we	 all	 try	 to	 feel	 in	 control	 and	 we	 all	 lie.	 I
recommend	 that	we	 all	 simply	 cop	 to	 this	 fact	 and	 hold	 our	 projections	more
lightly.	Don’t	 get	 attached	 to	 them.	Use	 them	 as	 a	mirror	 of	 your	 relationship
with	yourself.

How	Do	You	Respond	to	Projections?

In	 learning	 about	 projections,	 it	 is	 also	 important	 to	 notice	 when	 you	 take
another	 person’s	 projection	onto	 you.	Let’s	 say	 that	 Jim	 is	 angry	with	 you	 for
leaving	his	car	door	unlocked	and	says,	“This	is	a	high-crime	neighborhood.	You
should	know	better	than	to	leave	the	doors	unlocked!”	What	would	your	reaction



be?	Would	 your	 body	 relax	 or	 contract?	 And	 in	 your	 mind,	 would	 you	 start
berating	 yourself	 for	 being	 so	 stupid?	 If	 you	 go	 into	 an	 “I’m-a-bad-person”
soliloquy,	 then	 you	 are	 not	 really	 available	 to	 feel	 your	 feelings	 about	 the
incident:	 you	 have	 gone	 on	 automatic.	 Feeling	 ashamed	 or	 bad	 is	 a	 control
pattern,	a	familiar	way	of	dealing	with	the	anxiety	caused	by	not	being	in	control
of	how	another	responds	to	you.
This	 pattern	 interferes	 with	 your	 ability	 to	 express	 any	 sincere	 sorrow	 you

might	have	about	your	actions.	It	prevents	you	from	telling	Jim	you	resent	him
for	what	he	said	or	are	judging	him	for	being	too	much	of	a	worrywart.	Anything
that	 prevents	 you	 from	 expressing	 what	 you	 are	 experiencing	 will	 create
unfinished	 business	 for	 you.	 You	 won’t	 be	 able	 to	 get	 to	 completion	 or
forgiveness	until	you	express	what	you	feel	or	think.

When	 you’re	 unable	 to	 stay	 present,	 I	 always	 rerammend
confessing	 what’s	 going	 on	 for	 you	 as	 soon	 as	 you	 become
aware	 of	 it.	 If	 you’re	 thinking	 to	 yourself,	 “I’m	 getting
defensive	—	like	I	did	something	wrong,”	share	this.

If	taking	on	blame	when	someone	gets	angry	or	disappointed	with	you	is	one
of	your	control	patterns,	notice	what	happens	when	you	find	yourself	doing	this.
Notice	that	when	you	are	focused	on	what	a	bad	boy	or	bad	girl	you	are,	you	are
not	present	and	available	to	yourself	or	to	the	other	person.	If	you	find	yourself
feeling	 bad	 about	 yourself,	 to	 get	 yourself	 back	 into	 the	 present	 moment,
disclose	your	negative	self-talk.	As	you	may	have	noticed,	when	you’re	unable
to	stay	present,	I	always	recommend	confessing	what’s	going	on	for	you	as	soon
as	you	become	aware	of	it.	If	you’re	thinking	to	yourself,	“I’m	getting	defensive
—	 like	 I	 did	 something	wrong,”	 share	 this.	 Expressing	what’s	 being	withheld
results	 in	a	sense	of	closure	and	brings	you	back	 to	 the	present.	When	you	are
present,	you	are	open	and	available	to	what	is.	You’re	“in	the	flow.”

How	to	Receive	Projections

When	someone	projects	anger	on	you,	don’t	automatically	assume	 that	your
behavior	is	the	cause	of	it.	His	anger	is	his.	It’s	about	him.	The	reasons	for	it	are
inside	 him.	 Even	 if	 he	 blames	 you	 for	 it,	 this	 doesn’t	 mean	 that	 the	 blame



belongs	to	you.	It	just	means	that	he	thinks	you’re	to	blame.	On	the	other	hand,
don’t	automatically	assume	that	you	have	nothing	to	learn	about	yourself.	Often
a	 projection	 contains	 information	 about	 both	 people	 involved,	 so	 take	 a	 look
inside	and	see	if	you	are	triggered.	If	you	are,	it’s	probably	related	to	one	of	your
inner	conflicts	as	well	as	the	other	person’s.
When	 someone	 blames	 you	 for	 how	 she	 feels,	 certainly	 this	 can	 be	 a

frustrating	 experience.	 But	 remember,	 your	 frustration	 about	 the	 situation	 is
yours,	and	you	are	responsible	for	it.	You	may	protest,	“But	she	shouldn’t	blame
me!	She’s	 not	 taking	 responsibility	 for	 herself!”	You	 are	 correct	 that	 she’s	 not
taking	 responsibility	 for	 herself	 if	 she’s	 blaming	 you	 for	 her	 feeling.	 But	 by
saying	“she	shouldn’t,”	you	are	also	“not	taking	responsibility”	for	your	feelings
about	the	situation.	When	you	assume	that	you	know	what	another	person	should
or	shouldn’t	do,	you	are	projecting.	You	have	stopped	relating	and	have	slipped
into	an	ego-protective	control	pattern.	I’d	suggest	instead	saying	something	like
this:	“I	 feel	a	knot	 in	my	stomach	hearing	you	say	what	you	 just	said.	 I	 resent
you	for	saying,	‘You	made	me	feel	like	a	failure.’	I	imagine	that	you	make	you
feel	like	a	failure.”

Often	 a	 projection	 contains	 information	 about	 both	 people
involved,	so	take	a	look	inside	and	see	if	you	are	triggered.	If
you	are,	it’s	probably	related	to	one	of	your	inner	conflicts	as
well	as	the	other	person’s.

If	 another	 person	 is	 disappointed	with	 you	 and	you	 are	 unhappy	 about	 this,
you	 might	 say,	 “I’m	 upset	 hearing	 that	 you	 are	 disappointed	 with	 me”	 or	 “I
resent	you	for	saying	that	you’re	disappointed	with	me.”	Your	experience	is	your
own	upset	or	resentment.	It	is	not,	“You	shouldn’t	be	disappointed	with	me.”	It	is
not,	 “You	 have	 no	 reason	 to	 be	 disappointed	with	me.”	 It	 isn’t	 even,	 “It’s	 not
responsible	 for	 you	 to	 blame	me	 for	 your	 feelings	 of	 disappointment.”	 These
three	statements	are	about	her,	not	you.	They	probably	arise	 from	your	mind’s
attempt	to	avoid	feeling	not	in	control	of	how	another	person	views	you.	If	“you
shouldn’t	 feel___toward	 me”	 is	 a	 familiar	 inner	 dialogue,	 then	 your	 control
pattern	is	to	avoid	feeling	pain	or	vulnerability	about	how	others	respond	to	you
by	 projecting	 how	 they	 should	 be.	 What	 if	 you	 just	 let	 yourself	 feel	 the
helplessness,	the	sense	of	not	being	in	control?	What	if	you	felt	these	things	and
expressed	them?	Can	you	imagine	feeling	and	expressing,	“I	feel	pain”	instead



of	 trying	 to	 avoid	 the	 pain?	 Can	 you	 imagine	 not	 doing	 anything	 about	 your
pain,	just	letting	it	—	and	yourself	—	be?
Another	 way	 to	 deal	 with	 other	 people’s	 projections	 is	 to	 actively	 listen	 to

them.	Sometimes	 if	you	don’t	 react	but	 instead	simply	 restate	what	you	heard,
the	other	will	 get	 a	 chance	 to	hear	himself	 and	 reconsider	what	he	has	 said	 to
you.	Active	 listening	 also	 gives	 you	 the	 chance	 to	 see	 if	 the	 shoe	 fits	without
accepting	 or	 rejecting	 the	 projection	 too	 quickly.	 And	 finally,	 active	 listening
buys	you	time	and	gives	your	mind	something	to	do	instead	of	reacting.	This,	in
itself,	is	a	good	thing.

’Fessing	Up,	Part	Two

If	you	get	defensive	when	you	feel	blamed	or	criticized,	once	again,	sharing
your	self-talk	helps	you	disidentify	with	your	defensiveness	and	be	more	present,
as	in:	“I’m	noticing	that	my	self-talk	right	now	is	a	judgment	that	you	shouldn’t
be	 blaming	me	 for	 your	 reactions.”	 Your	 experience	 is	 your	 noticing	 of	 your
mental	chatter.	When	you	 report	 judgmental	 self-talk	as	 something	you	notice,
you	are	 taking	responsibility	for	 it.	Doing	so	can	minimize	any	 tendencies	you
may	have	to	defend	it	or	identify	with	it.

Noticing	 judgmental	 self-talk	 can	 help	 you	 stop	 identifying
with	 being	 right	 and	 start	 uncovering	 your	 own	 self-
judgment.

Noticing	 judgmental	 self-talk	can	help	you	 stop	 identifying	with	being	 right
and	 start	uncovering	your	own	self-judgment.	You	 take	back	 the	projection	by
experimenting	with	substituting	“I	am”	for	“You	shouldn’t”;	“I	am	blaming	me”
instead	 of	 “You	 shouldn’t	 blame	 me.”	 You	 may	 discover	 that	 when	 another
person	 blames	 you,	 you	 start	 to	 feel	 very	 self-blaming	 in	 reaction.	 If	 so,	 his
actions	may	have	helped	you	take	a	look	at	one	of	your	control	patterns.	Maybe
you	could	even	thank	him!

Taking	Back	Projections	in	Marriage



When	you	blame	another	person	for	your	pain,	it	clouds	the	truth	and	makes
corrective	action	less	likely.	In	my	last	marriage,	I	typically	worked	fifty	hours	a
week	 to	 support	myself	 and	my	 husband	 and	 his	 (in	my	 judgment)	 expensive
spending	 habits.	 At	 the	 time,	 he	 was	 in	 real	 estate	 sales	 and	 wasn’t	 earning
anything	 but	 was	 doing	 most	 of	 the	 discretionary	 spending.	 Thus,	 it	 was
tempting	for	me	 to	get	 into	blaming	him	for	my	stress	 level,	which	I	did	quite
often.
This	 is	 known	 in	 twelve-step	 circles	 as	 codependency:	 I	 focus	 on	 how	 he

needs	to	change	instead	of	on	how	I	am	feeling.	As	long	as	my	attention	is	on
how	awful,	 how	unfair,	 how	 selfish	he	 is,	 then	 I’m	effectively	distracted	 from
paying	attention	to	me.	Yet	I	am	the	only	one	I	have	any	control	over.	Blaming	is
great	for	the	ego.	I	get	to	feel	wronged	but	righteous.	Sure,	I	still	feel	pain,	but
it’s	pain	about	the	wrong	thing.	Getting	Real	means	feeling	my	pain	about	how	I
am,	not	about	how	 the	other	 is	or	 isn’t.	Pain	can	be	an	effective	motivator	 for
change,	but	only	if	we’re	honest	about	its	source.
Projecting	 blame	onto	my	husband	 for	my	 situation	 confused	 the	 issue.	 If	 I

really	wanted	to	go	into	fantasyland	and	confuse	things	even	more,	I	could	have
attributed	motives	to	him,	such	as,	“He	envies	how	easily	I	make	money,	so	he
feels	 entitled	 to	 take	 from	me.”	 (When	 I	 am	 not	 owning	my	 anger,	my	mind
loves	 to	 elevate	 the	 self	 at	 the	 other’s	 expense	—	 to	 prove	 that	 he	 really	 is	 a
schmuck	 and	 I	 really	 am	 a	 saint.)	 With	 some	 effort,	 I	 learned	 the	 difference
between	my	experience	of	pain	and	his	behavior.	I	came	to	the	simple	awareness
that	 I	 resented	 him	 for	 buying	 the	 big	Mercedes	 and	 the	 gold	 watch	 and	 for
mortgaging	the	house.	This	was	my	experience.	I	stopped	focusing	on	what	he
should	or	shouldn’t	be	doing.	I	was	feeling	tired	most	of	the	time.	That	was	my
experience.	He	was	not	 to	blame	for	 that.	Attending	 to	my	own	feelings	 led	 to
some	important	and	very	real	changes	in	how	I	related	to	my	husband.	I	stopped
nagging	 him	 about	 what	 he	 should	 do.	 I	 stopped	 trying	 to	 change	 him
(controlling)	and	continued	to	focus	on	simply	feeling	and	expressing	what	I	felt
(relating).

When	you	blame	another	person	for	your	pain,	 it	clouds	the
truth	and	makes	corrective	action	less	likely.

The	situation	didn’t	change,	so	I	kept	expressing	the	same	feelings	day	in	and
day	 out:	 “I	 resent	 you	 for	 buying	 that	 tuxedo.”	 “I	 resent	 you	 for	 not	 going	 to



work.”	 I	 stayed	 in	my	 experience	 instead	 of	 fantasizing	 about	 how	 he	 should
change.	(Remember,	the	goal	of	authentic	self-expression	is	not	to	get	the	other
to	 change.)	 After	 about	 a	 year	 of	 this,	 I	 got	 to	 the	 point	 where	 I	 viewed	 his
behavior	 as	 his	 way	 of	 coping	 rather	 than	 judging	 it	 only	 in	 terms	 of	 how	 it
frustrated	my	wants.	I	let	go	of	trying	to	make	an	unworkable	partnership	work.
As	long	as	I	had	been	focused	on	what	my	husband	should	do,	I	was	feeding

an	 illusion	 about	 how	 I	 thought	 things	 should	 be.	 I	was	 not	 in	 touch	with	my
own	 experience.	 Yet	 my	 experience	 was	 precisely	 what	 I	 needed	 to	 feel	 and
express.	I	think	there’s	a	moral	to	this	story:	if	you	want	to	make	good	decisions,
pay	attention	to	what	is.	Don’t	get	distracted	by	your	ideas	about	what	should	be.
Focusing	 on	 what	 should	 be	 is	 a	 way	 to	 avoid	 making	 decisions	 and	 taking
action	on	what	you	know	to	be	the	truth.	I	finally	realized	that	decisions	about
my	 life	 need	 to	 be	made	 based	 on	my	 experience,	 not	 on	 a	wish	 or	 a	 should
about	someone	else.

The	goal	of	authentic	self-expression	is	not	to	get	the	other	to
change.

Taking	Back	Projections	in	a	Nutshell

•	Whenever	you	have	an	idea	about	how	another	person	should	be,	you	are
revealing	as	much	about	you	as	you	are	about	the	other	person.

•	If	you	notice	that	you’re	repeatedly	triggered	by	something	someone	does,
this	may	signal	that	you	feel	unresolved	about	this	aspect	of	your	own	life.

•	Understanding	projection	can	help	us	be	more	humble	about	our	judgments
of	others.

•	If	you’re	feeling	judgmental,	use	the	language,	“I	notice	I’m	having	a
judgment”	or	“I’m	having	judgmental	thoughts.”	In	this	way,	you’re	making
a	self-disclosure	rather	than	a	pronouncement	that	you’re	attached	to.

•	Projections	are	useful	because	we	often	need	to	get	our	buttons	pushed	so	we
can	notice	what	they	are.

•	To	own	a	projection,	start	by	communicating	whatever	you	are	aware	of.	It
could	be	a	thought,	a	judgment,	a	complaint,	or	an	emotion	like	fear	or
anger.	Then	sense	what’s	going	on	in	your	body	and	listen	to	your	voice.	Try



on	the	idea	that	you	may	be	projecting.	If	you	are	saying	what	the	other
should	do,	try	looking	at	it	as	something	you	think	you	should	do.	While	this
should	might	still	be	unconscious,	experimenting	with	your	language	can
help	make	it	conscious.

•	When	you	think	someone	is	projecting	onto	you,	see	if	the	shoe	fits	you	—
even	though	it	may	fit	her	better.



CHAPTER	8
REVISING	AN	EARLIER

STATEMENT
IT’S	OKAY	TO	GO	OUT	ANDO

COME	IN	AGAIN

Cheryl	is	on	a	first	date	with	a	man	she	likes	a	lot.	He	catches	her	by	surprise
when,	after	about	an	hour	of	conversation,	he	asks	her	how	she	feels	about	him.
Instinctively	and	without	really	checking	in	with	herself,	Cheryl	replies,	“Oh,	I
think	you’re	a	nice	man,”	when	 the	 truth	 is	she	 is	wildly	attracted	 to	him.	She
notices	that	after	she	says	those	words,	he	seems	to	shrink	down	into	his	chair,	as
if	deflated.	She	realizes	 that	her	words	have	affected	him	and	 that	she	was	not
being	 truthful.	 So	 now	 what	 does	 she	 do?	 Is	 it	 too	 late?	 Did	 she	 ruin	 things
forever?	Maybe	not.	Picture	this:	what	if	she	calls	him	up	the	next	day	and	tells
him	 the	 truth	 rather	 than	 trying	 to	maintain	 an	 image	of	 being	 in	 control.	 She
might	say	something	like,	“Sam,	I	have	been	thinking	about	that	conversation	we
had	after	dinner	last	night	when	you	asked	how	I	felt	about	you.	Well,	I	didn’t
speak	 the	 truth.	What’s	 true	 is	 I’m	 wildly	 attracted	 to	 you,	 but	 at	 the	 time	 I
wasn’t	 all	 there.	 I	 think	 your	 question	 took	me	 by	 surprise,	 so	 I	 just	went	 on
automatic	and	tried	to	act	cool.”
Now	 imagine	 how	Sam	might	 feel	 upon	 hearing	 this.	Do	 you	 imagine	 he’s

going	to	think	less	of	Cheryl?	Do	you	think	he’s	going	to	say,	“That’s	it.	I	don’t
ever	want	to	see	you	again”?	I	doubt	it.	He’d	probably	appreciate	her	honesty.

Giving	yourself	permission	to	“go	out	and	come	in	again”	is
one	of	the	kindest	things	you	can	do	for	yourself.

Maybe	you’ve	been	in	this	kind	of	situation	too.	Maybe	you	were	stressed	or



distractedor	 trying	 to	 push	 your	 feelings	 into	 the	 background.	 Afterward	 you
wished	that	you’d	said	something	different	to	the	other	person.	Giving	yourself
permission	to	“go	out	and	come	in	again”	is	one	of	the	kindest	things	you	can	do
for	yourself.

Self-Assessment	Quiz

The	following	quiz	will	help	you	assess	how	much	practice	you	need	with	this
truth	skill.	For	each	statement,	rate	yourself	from	1	to	5	(with	1	being	mostly	not
true	and	5	mostly	true).

1.	Once	I’ve	taken	a	position	on	something,	it’s	difficult	to	admit	that	I’ve
changed	my	mind.

2.	I	like	to	get	things	settled	once	and	for	all.	If	I’ve	decided	something,	then
that’s	that.

3.	I	rarely	admit	to	making	a	mistake	after	the	fact.
4.	I	find	it	hard	to	imagine	that	expressing	a	feeling	would	make	it	disappear,
soften,	or	change	into	something	else.

5.	I	would	never	say,	“I	didn’t	really	mean	that.”
6.	I	frequently	realize	later	what	I	wish	I’d	said	at	the	time.	But	I	just	let	it	go,
because	I’d	feel	too	stupid	going	back	to	the	person.

Did	you	score	any	3’s,	4’s,	and	5’s?	If	so,	you’ll	find	this	chapter	very	useful.

The	Monday	Morning	Quarterback	Process

In	chapter	3,	“Being	Transparent,”	I	told	the	story	of	Jenny	and	Fred	and	their
thirtieth	 wedding	 anniversary	 party,	 when	 Fred	 made	 the	 comment	 about	 the
Thirty	Years	War.	Fred	had	planned	 to	continue	by	emphasizing	how	good	 the
marriage	 had	 been	 in	 spite	 of	 the	 occasional	 conflicts,	 but	 he	 got	 interrupted.
Jenny	misunderstood	the	remark	and	felt	hurt	by	it.	Jenny	did	have	the	presence
of	mind	to	speak	about	her	feelings,	so	they	were	able	to	clear	things	up.	But	a
few	days	later	when	they	told	me	about	it	in	my	office,	I	coached	them	about	one
more	 thing	—	 the	Monday	morning	 quarterback	 process.	 This	 process	 allows
people	to	take	a	look	together	at	what	happened.	Another	name	for	this	process



is	 “if	 I	 had	 it	 to	do	over.”	 I	 suggest	using	 this	process	 after	 an	 interaction	has
gone	 off	 course	 because	 of	 one	 or	 both	 partners	 going	 into	 a	 control	 pattern
instead	of	being	present	with	their	truth.
I	 invited	Fred	and	Jenny	 to	share	“what	 they	wished	 they’d	done	or	said”	 if

they	had	had	more	presence	of	mind	at	the	time.	Fred	took	his	turn	first:	“Jenny,
if	I	had	it	to	do	over,	I	wouldn’t	let	Harry	cut	me	off.	Even	though	he	was	trying
to	do	a	good	thing,	I	could	have	said,	‘Wait	Harry,	I	have	quite	a	bit	more	to	say
on	this	matter.’	And	then	I	would	have	finished	my	toast	 to	you	 the	way	I	had
planned	 it,	 talking	 about	 the	 good	 times	 we’ve	 had.”	 After	 making	 this
statement,	Fred	reported	that	he	felt	more	relaxed,	like	he’d	taken	a	load	off	his
mind.	 Jenny	 seemed	 to	 appreciate	 hearing	 it	 too.	 At	 first	 Jenny	 had	 some
difficulty	seeing	what	she	might	have	done	differently.	But	then	she	said,	“I	wish
I’d	asked	you	what	you	meant	by	that	comment	before	I	jumped	to	a	conclusion.
I	 realize	 that	 I	 often	 jump	 to	 the	 worst	 possible	 interpretation	 of	 your	 words
without	first	checking	out	what	you	mean.”

Any	time	you	see	a	situation	more	clearly	in	hindsight,	it’s
good	to	use	the	Monday	morning	quarterback	process.	Tell
the	other	person	that	you’d	like	to	revisit	the	incident	to	share
with	her	a	new	insight.

Any	 time	you	 see	 a	 situation	more	 clearly	 in	 hindsight,	 it’s	 good	 to	 use	 the
Monday	morning	 quarterback	 process.	Tell	 the	 other	 person	 that	 you’d	 like	 to
revisit	 the	incident	 to	share	with	her	a	new	insight.	Then	simply	say,	“I	 realize
now	that	I	wish	I’d	done	(or	said)...”	or,	“If	I	had	it	to	do	over,	I	would...”	Often
once	you	initiate	the	process,	the	other	person	will	offer	to	take	a	turn	too,	telling
you	what	they	wish	they	had	done	differently	as	well.	This	kind	of	conversation
can	be	very	healing,	both	 for	 the	 relationship	and	 for	 the	 individuals	 involved.
Jenny	gained	an	 important	 insight	about	herself	when	she	did	 the	process	with
Fred.	She	saw	her	tendency	to	jump	to	conclusions.	Fred	also	got	to	see	one	of
his	 patterns	 more	 clearly	 too	—	 a	 tendency	 to	 “go	 with	 the	 flow”	 instead	 of
asserting	himself.	Monday	morning	quarterbacking	can	be	a	very	nonthreatening
way	to	invite	the	other	person	to	take	another	crack	at	resolving	a	situation	that
may	be	unfinished	between	you.



Going	Out	and	Coming	In	Again	Exercise

Think	of	a	situation	involving	another	person	that	you	wish	you	had	handled
better.	What	do	you	wish	you	had	done,	said,	or	not	said?	Now	imagine	going
back	to	this	person	and	telling	him	how	you	wish	you’d	handled	it.	If	you	wish,
call	the	person	and	share	what	you	wish	you’d	done	at	the	time.	And	leave	space
afterward	for	him	to	respond.

Nobody’s	Perfect

One	reason	people	give	for	not	“going	out	and	coming	in	again”	is	that	much
of	their	energy	is	tied	up	in	criticizing	themselves	for	not	doing	it	right	the	first
time.	If	this	is	true	of	you,	do	you	really	think	that	you	can	do	everything	right
the	 first	 time?	As	you	get	more	practice	with	 this	 truth	 skill,	 you	will	 become
more	humble	and	more	self-forgiving	—	especially	when	you	see	how	unskilled
everybody	 else	 is	 at	 the	 same	 things	 you	 need	 practice	with.	 Let’s	 lighten	 up
about	 our	 human	 foibles.	 Almost	 everyone	 I	 know	 has	 had	 the	 experience	 of
thinking	 later	 what	 they	 wished	 they	 had	 done	 or	 said	 or	 not	 said	 or	 of
withholding	a	feeling	until	weeks	or	months	after	the	fact.	As	you	practice	this
truth	skill,	you’ll	find	that	the	gaps	between	when	you	had	the	opportunity	to	say
something	and	when	you	actually	do	say	it	become	smaller	and	smaller.

As	you	get	more	practice	with	this	truth	skill,	you	will	become
more	humble	and	more	self-forgiving.

As	 you	 have	 probably	 already	 realized,	 Getting	 Real	 does	 not	 mean	 being
perfectly	honest.	More	often,	it’s	about	being	imperfectly	honest,	 that	 is	feeling
and	 saying	what	 you	 are	 aware	 of	 in	 the	moment	with	 the	 understanding	 that
once	 you’ve	 expressed	 yourself,	 you’ll	 either	 see	 something	 more	 or	 you’ll
realize	your	feelings	have	changed.	The	impossibility	of	being	perfectly	honest
is	 one	 reason	why	 honest	 communication	 is	 such	 a	 powerful	 vehicle	 for	 self-
realization.	 Each	 time	 you	 speak	 your	 truth,	 you	 get	 to	 see	 it	 in	 a	 new	 light,
which	generally	leads	to	reevaluating	it,	noticing	that	there’s	more	to	it	(or	less
to	 it)	 than	 you	 thought.	 That’s	 why	 revising	 an	 earlier	 statement	 is	 such	 an



important	truth	skill.	You’re	never	going	to	be	“perfect,	right,	and	done.”	You	are
always	in	process.	Change	is	the	name	of	the	game.

The	impossibility	of	being	perfectly	honest	is	one	reason	why
honest	communication	is	such	a	powerful	vehicle	for
selfrealization.	Each	time	you	speak	your	truth,	you	get	to	see
it	in	a	new	light,	which	generally	leads	to	reevaluating	it,
noticing	that	there’s	more	to	it	(or	less	to	it)	than	you	thought.

In	 any	 situation,	 all	 you	 can	do	 is	 express	 the	 truth	you	 are	 aware	of	 at	 the
time.	So	in	real	life,	even	when	Cheryl	(after	her	date	with	Sam)	does	go	back	to
revise	her	earlier	statement,	she	still	may	not	be	ready	to	admit	that	she’s	wildly
attracted	to	him.	In	that	case,	she	can	still	 tell	him	that	she	wasn’t	all	 there	the
other	 night,	 was	 surprised	 by	 his	 question,	 and	 would	 like	 to	 revisit	 the
conversation	 the	 next	 time	 they	 get	 together.	 She	 could	 be	 surprised	 at	 what
happens	next	in	her	awareness,	though,	because	very	often,	after	disclosing	your
present	foreground,	a	new,	formerly	unconscious	foreground	emerges.	And	that
foreground	 might	 very	 well	 be,	 “And	 now	 I’m	 ready	 to	 admit	 I’m	 wildly
attracted	to	you.”	Getting	Real	is	like	peeling	away	the	layers	of	an	onion.	Once
you	 report	 your	 present	 experience,	 a	 new	 and	 deeper	 version	 of	 the	 truth	 is
often	revealed.
Usually	when	people	 allow	 themselves	 to	 imagine	going	out	 and	 coming	 in

again,	they	become	energized	—	a	little	scared,	yes,	but	also	excited.	If	you	are
contemplating	trying	this	process	with	someone	and	you’re	feeling	fearful,	tune
in	 to	 the	 bodily	 sensations	 you	 normally	 associate	 with	 fear,	 and	 then	 notice
whether	it’s	excitement	or	fear	that	you	are	feeling.	Even	if	it’s	you	can	probably
still	do	it.	Remember,	in	most	cases,	fear	is	simply	a	sign	that	you’re	moving	into
unknown	territory,	not	a	signal	to	turn	back.	Unknown	territory	is	the	domain	of
discovery	 and	 the	 breeding	 ground	 for	 self-trust.	 If	 after	 you	 can	 feel	 and
acknowledge	your	fear,	it	becomes	less	intense,	then	the	risk	is	probably	worth
taking.

Remember,	in	most	cases,	fear	is	simply	a	sign	that	you’re
moving	into	unknown	territory,	not	a	signal	to	turn	back.
Unknown	territory	is	the	domain	of	discovery	and	the



breeding	ground	for	self-trust.

Making	Amends

If	 you	 discover	 that	 your	 actions	 have	 harmed	 another	 person,	 expressing
regret	 or	 making	 a	 Monday	 morning	 quarterback	 declaration	 may	 not	 be
sufficient	 to	 bring	 closure	 to	 the	matter.	You	may	want	 to	 ask,	 “Is	 there	 some
way	 I	can	make	 it	up	 to	you?”	Asking	 this	question	 is	appropriate	only	 if	you
sincerely	wish	to	make	amends.	And	while	you’re	deciding	if	you	sincerely	want
to,	 remember	 that	 achieving	 closure	 is	 as	 much	 for	 you	 as	 it	 is	 for	 the	 other
person.	It	will	help	you	feel	complete,	so	you	will	no	longer	be	distracted	by	this
unfinished	business.
When	 I	 work	 with	 families,	 I	 often	 find	 that	 parents	 do	 things	 in	 a	 fit	 of

reactivity	and	 realize	 later	 that	 they	have	 really	hurt	 their	 children.	When	 they
recognize	 the	 hurt	 they	 have	 caused,	 they	 often	 feel	 relieved	 to	 know	 there	 is
something	they	can	do.	When	they	ask	the	child,	“Is	there	anything	I	can	do	to
make	it	up	to	you?”	the	child	is	usually	very	appreciative.	Often	just	hearing	that
question	 from	 a	 parent	 helps	 to	 heal	 old	 wounds	 as	 well	 as	 the	 present	 one.
Children	 are	often	moved	 to	 completely	 let	 go	of	 the	hurt	 they	were	 carrying:
“No,	I	don’t	need	anything	from	you.	Just	hearing	that	you’re	sorry	means	a	lot.”
I	coach	children	not	 to	be	 too	easy	on	 their	parents,	however,	 especially	 if	 the
child	has	a	pattern	of	protecting	the	parent	from	discomfort.	The	act	of	deciding
on	something	a	parent	can	do	for	you	and	then	asking	for	it	can	create	an	even
more	profound	healing	—	for	the	parent	as	well	as	the	child.

Remember	that	achieving	closure	is	as	much	for	you	as	it	is
for	the	other	person.	It	will	help	you	feel	complete,	and	you
will	not	be	distracted	by	this	unfinished	business.

Sometimes	children	do	dumb	things	that	cause	real	harm	to	their	parents	also.
I	 recall	one	meeting	 I	had	with	a	 father	and	 son.	Timmy	had	broken	his	dad’s
expensive	wristwatch,	and	Leon,	Timmy’s	dad,	was	expressing	his	anger.	When
Timmy	asked,	“Is	there	anything	I	can	do	to	make	it	up	to	you?”	Leon	got	a	big
grin	 on	 his	 face,	 gave	 his	 son	 a	 hug,	 and	 said,	 “Let’s	 make	 a	 list.”	Working



together	they	came	up	with	a	list	of	ten	things	that	Timmy	would	do	to	help	him
and	 his	 dad	 get	 closure	 on	 the	 incident	—	 things	 like	 “wash	 my	 truck	 every
month	for	the	next	year,”	“cook	me	breakfast,”	and	“do	your	homework	without
being	 nagged.”	 What	 started	 out	 as	 an	 extremely	 traumatic	 family	 therapy
session	for	Timmy	ended	up	being	empowering	and	fun.	It	also	gave	both	father
and	son	some	practice	at	win-win	negotiating.

Making	Amends	Exercise

Think	of	a	situation	in	which	you	did	something	that	harmed	another	person.
Recall	 exactly	what	 you	 did	 or	 said,	 being	 as	 specific	 as	 possible.	Notice	 any
tendency	you	may	have	 to	 lay	 a	 guilt	 trip	 on	yourself.	Guilt	 tripping	 can	be	 a
kind	 of	 control	 pattern,	 a	 patterned	 way	 of	 dealing	 with	 mistakes	 or
transgressions.	 It	 can	 lead	 you	 to	 focus	 more	 on	 how	 wrong	 you	 were	 (a
judgment)	than	on	what	you	actually	did	and	how	you	feel	(your	experience).
If	you	find	yourself	feeling	guilty,	come	back	to	the	specifics	of	what	you	did

and	how	you	feel	about	what	you	did	and	about	the	consequences.	Notice	how
you	actually	feel.	Doing	this	instead	of	focusing	on	what	a	bad	person	you	are	is
much	more	constructive.	Now	make	a	list	of	things	you	might	do	for	the	person
to	make	it	up	to	them,	to	make	amends.	If	you	wish,	call	her	and	arrange	a	time
to	meet	in	person	so	you	can	actually	express	to	her	what	you	feel	and	what	you
are	willing	to	do	about	it.	Let	the	other	person	have	a	voice	in	the	decision	about
what	you	do	to	make	your	amends.

Admitting	a	Lie

You	 can	 also	 practice	 revising	 an	 earlier	 statement	when	 you	 have	 lied	 and
want	to	come	clean	about	it.	We	all	hate	to	get	caught	in	a	lie.	But	it	happens.	It
has	 happened	 more	 than	 once	 to	 people	 in	 high	 office,	 such	 as	 the	 U.S.
presidency.	 In	my	experiences	with	people	 in	 less	 lofty	places	—	in	marriages
and	in	work	teams	—	I	have	been	amazed	to	see	how	forgiving	people	are	when
someone	admits	to	having	lied.
In	a	mid-sized	manufacturing	company	where	I	consulted,	a	certain	manager,

Sal,	tried	to	cover	up	the	fact	that	his	actions	had	been	responsible	for	hundreds
of	thousands	of	dollars	of	damage	to	a	piece	of	company	equipment.	I	could	see
that	 everyone	 knew	 that	 Sal	 was	 responsible.	 But	 Sal	maintained	 his	 position



that	 an	 outside	 vendor	 had	 been	 to	 blame	 for	 the	 accident.	While	 the	 incident
was	under	investigation,	the	company	president,	Tom,	came	to	me	and	confided,
“If	Sal	tries	to	deny	his	responsibility	for	this,	he’s	history.	I	don’t	want	him	in
my	 company.	 But	 if	 he’ll	 come	 out	 and	 admit	 his	mistake,	 I’ll	 gladly	 forgive
him.	 Everyone	makes	mistakes.	 Lying	 and	maintaining	 your	 innocence	 sets	 a
bad	example.	I	can’t	tolerate	that	around	here.”	I	thought	to	myself,	“If	only	Sal
could	hear	this.”	So	I	shared	this	thought	with	Tom	and	then	asked,	“Is	there	any
way	you’d	be	willing	to	say	this	publicly?”	Tom	affirmed	that	it	was	not	his	job
to	give	Sal	an	easy	way	out;	if	Sal	was	a	person	of	integrity,	he’d	come	clean.	If
not,	so	be	it.
After	that	conversation	with	Tom,	I	wrestled	with	how	to	get	more	authentic

communication	happening	between	these	two	men	about	the	incident.	Finally,	I
realized	 that	 I	 had	 to	 be	 authentic	 about	 my	 own	 feelings.	 I	 couldn’t	 take
responsibility	for	others’	authenticity.	So	I	set	up	a	time	to	tell	Tom	“what	I	wish
I’d	said,”	which	was:	“Tom,	now	I	know	a	secret	of	yours	that	you	don’t	want
me	to	divulge.	I’m	angry	with	you	for	telling	me	something	without	first	letting
me	 know	 that	 you	were	 entrusting	me	with	 a	 secret.	 I	would	 have	 said	 that	 I
can’t	 guarantee	 that	 I’ll	 keep	 it.	 I	 don’t	 feel	 good	 about	 keeping	 secrets,
especially	 when	 I	 think	what	 you	 said	 about	 admitting	mistakes	 is	 something
everyone	in	your	company	would	want	to	know.	It’s	vital	information	about	the
culture	you	are	envisioning	around	here.”
This	 disclosure	 moved	 Tom	 to	 make	 a	 public	 general	 statement	 about	 his

vision	of	a	company	that	tolerated	and	forgave	mistakes	if	they	were	owned	up
to	and	if	amends	were	made.	When	Sal	heard	this,	he	was	still	reluctant.	He	had
been	punished	often	in	the	past	for	telling	the	truth	about	his	mistakes.	But	after
some	deliberation,	he	did	go	to	Tom	personally.	He	described	the	entire	incident
—	what	he	did,	how	he	felt	afterward,	how	he	felt	about	 lying,	his	fears	about
telling	 the	 truth,	 and	 how	 he	 alone	 was	 responsible	 for	 the	 damage.	 He	 was
amazed	to	find	that	Tom	received	his	disclosure	with	compassion	and	an	attitude
of	forgiveness.	At	my	suggestion,	Tom	later	went	back	to	Sal	to	share	more	of
what	 he’d	 felt	 before	 Sal’s	 confession	—	 the	 anger,	 the	 judgment,	 the	 fear	 of
losing	Sal	as	a	worker.	Once	that	conversation	occurred,	both	men	felt	complete,
and	everyone	could	put	the	incident	behind	them	and	get	back	to	work.

Steps	To	Take	When	Revising



Practicing	 this	 truth	 skill	 helps	you	 let	 go	of	 feelings	you	are	 carrying,	 thus
bringing	you	more	into	the	present.	It	also	gives	the	other	person	a	chance	to	get
over	whatever	he	may	have	been	carrying	about	you.	 It’s	a	good	way	 to	bring
your	relationship	up	to	date,	to	clear	the	air.	There	are	several	steps	you	can	take
when	dealing	with	any	situation	that	needs	revising.	They	are:

1.	First	let	the	other	person	know	that	you	have	had	some	second	thoughts	and
make	sure	you	have	their	attention;	invite	them	into	conversation	by	stating
that	you’d	like	to	revise	what	you	said	or	did.

2.	Don’t	make	excuses.	Take	responsibility	for	your	words	or	deeds.
3.	Then	report	what	has	changed	for	you	—	what	you	are	aware	of	now	that
you	were	not	aware	of	at	the	time:	“I	had	the	realization	that...”	“I	want	to
let	you	know	what	was	really	going	on	with	me...”	“I	want	to	make
amends...,”	and	so	on.	In	this	step,	use	all	the	communication	tools	we	have
already	identified	in	this	book.	Use	I	messages	to	help	you	stay	in	your	own
experience.

4.	And	finally	listen	to	what	the	other	person	has	to	say,	and	aim	to	be	more
present	this	time.	Leave	space	for	the	other	to	take	a	turn	saying	how	she
wishes	she’d	done	things	differently	also,	if	she	seems	so	inclined.

If	 you	give	yourself	 permission	 to	 revise	 and	 revisit	whenever	 you	need	 to,
then	you’ll	 take	each	interaction	more	lightly.	You	don’t	have	to	 try	so	hard	to
get	 things	perfect	 the	 first	 time.	Most	 things	we	do	 are	not	 cast	 in	 stone.	Yes,
your	words	may	have	hurt	someone.	Or	yes,	you	may	have	been	too	agreeable
and	 now	 you	 are	 disappointing	 someone.	When	 your	 revision	 comes	 from	 an
authentic	 place,	 usually	 the	 other	 person	will	 sense	 the	 caring	 that	 it	 takes	 to
make	the	effort	to	go	out	and	come	in	again.	And	even	if	he	doesn’t,	you’ll	live.

If	you	give	yourself	permission	to	revise	and	revisit	whenever
you	need	to,	then	you’ll	take	each	interaction	more	lightly.
You	don’t	have	to	try	so	hard	to	get	things	perfect	the	first
time.

Revising	in	a	Nutshell



•	Often	when	you	learn	how	your	actions	have	affected	another	person,	you
feel	sincere	regret	or	empathy	or	you	see	more	of	the	whole	picture	and
realize	that	you	were	reacting	from	a	pattern.

•	Sharing	your	afterthoughts	is	a	way	of	clearing	things	up.
•	When	you	realize	your	actions	have	harmed	another	person,	offering	to	make
amends	is	another	way	of	clearing	things	up.

•	Sometimes	after	you	state	what	you	wish	you’d	done	or	said	differently,	the
other	person	joins	you	and	makes	a	revision	of	her	own.

•	When	these	tools	for	revising	an	earlier	statement	are	used	by	people	in	a
conflict	situation,	they	usually	foster	a	softer,	more	openhearted	attitude
between	conflicting	parties.

•	After	you	use	this	truth	skill	for	a	while,	you	will	probably	notice	that	the
gap	between	when	you	could	have	said	something	and	when	you	actually	do
gets	smaller.	By	going	out	and	coming	in	again,	you	train	yourself	to	be
more	present	the	next	time.



CHAPTER	9
HOLDING	DIFFERENCES

SEEING	OTHER	VIEWPOINTS
WITHOUT	LOSING	YOUR	OWN

In	the	ancient	martial	art	of	aikido,	being	centered	means	the	ability	to	engage
and	face	the	world	as	your	“opponent”	faces	the	world,	seeing	from	the	other’s
viewpoint	without	losing	your	own.	And	so	it	is	in	life:	if	you	want	to	see	reality
clearly	and	take	action	based	on	all	available	input,	you	must	be	able	to	hold
differences	—	to	maintain	your	own	viewpoint	while	considering	other	people’s
views.	This	truth	skills	enables	you	to	take	in	several	perspectives	at	once	so	you
can	consider	them	in	relation	to	one	another.	It	allows	you	to	see	more	of	what	is
actually	going	on	rather	than	narrowing	your	vision	to	feel	right,	safe,	or	certain.
Your	consciousness	becomes	spacious	and	nonreactive,	and	you	can	see	your
options	more	clearly.
In	dealing	with	differences	or	disagreements,	you	basically	have	three	choices:

you	can	try	to	get	other	people	to	see	things	your	way;	you	can	give	in	to	others
to	minimize	conflict;	or	you	can	practice	holding	differences	—	 truth	 skill	 #8.
Many	people	assume	they	have	only	the	first	 two	choices	—	to	dominate	or	to
submit.	But	in	a	world	full	of	complexity	and	change,	these	first	two	options	lead
to	solutions	that	are	often	simplistic	or	shortsighted.	Holding	differences	enables
you	to	draw	a	bigger	circle	around	two	or	more	competing	views	so	that	you	can
see	how	they	are	complementary	parts	of	a	whole	instead	of	mutually	exclusive.
A	 famous	 Sufi	 teaching	 story	 relates	 how	 three	 blind	 men	 encountered	 an

elephant	as	they	were	walking	down	the	road	one	day.	The	first	blind	man	came
upon	 the	elephant’s	 side	and	asserted	 to	his	companions,	 “The	 road	ends	here.
We	have	come	 to	a	wall.”	The	second	bumped	 into	one	of	 the	elephant’s	 legs,
wrapped	his	arms	around	it,	and	protested,	“No,	it	is	only	a	tree.”	A	moment	or
you	can	practice	holding	differences.	later	the	third	blind	man	came	into	contact
with	the	elephant’s	tail	and	assured	his	cohorts,	“It	most	certainly	is	nothing	but



a	 rope.”	 This	 story	 challenges	 belief	 systems	 based	 on	 dualistic,	 either-or
interpretations	 of	 reality.	 Humanity	 as	 a	 whole	 is	 very	 much	 like	 those	 three
blind	men,	each	clinging	to	a	little	piece	of	the	truth	and	ignoring	how	that	piece
might	 fit	with	 others	 in	 an	 attempt	 to	 remain	 right,	 safe,	 and	 certain.	At	 some
point	in	our	histories,	we	learned	to	fear	differences.	We	got	the	idea	that	if	you
see	one	thing,	and	I	see	something	else,	one	of	us	must	be	wrong;	or	if	you	want
one	thing	and	I	want	something	else,	one	of	us	must	 lose.	We	learned	that	 if	a
person	reveals	his	unique	point,	angle,	or	range	of	view,	he	is	opening	himself	up
to	being	challenged.

In	dealing	with	differences	or	disagreements,	you	basically
have	three	choices:	you	can	try	to	get	other	people	to	see
things	your	way;	you	can	give	in	to	others	to	minimize
conflict;	or	you	can	practice	holding	differences.

To	find	harmony	in	this	world	of	diversity,	we	need	to	embrace	paradox.	We
need	to	recognize	both	the	inevitability	of	disagreement	between	people	and	the
possibility	 of	 harmony	 through	 approaching	 conflict	 as	 an	 opportunity	 to	 see
more	of	what	is	really	going	on.	It	 takes	more	than	one	blind	man	to	“see”	the
whole	elephant!

Self-Assessment	Quiz

The	 following	 quiz	will	 help	 you	 to	 assess	 how	 skillful	 you	 are	 at	 holding
differences.	For	each	statement,	rate	yourself	from	1	to	5	(with	1	being	usually
not	true	and	5	being	usually	true).

1.	I	avoid	people	who	have	values	and	beliefs	very	different	from	mine.
2.	When	someone	is	angry	or	disappointed	with	me,	it’s	hard	for	me	to	simply
let	him	feel	what	he	feels.	I	try	to	explain	my	side	of	things	so	he	won’t	feel
angry	anymore.

3.	It’s	easy	for	me	to	lose	myself	in	an	intimate	relationship.
4.	I	tend	to	be	swayed	by	strong	arguments	delivered	with	confidence.
5.	After	listening	to	someone	who	strongly	and	forcefully	disagrees	with	me,	I
sometimes	forget	what	I	was	about	to	say.



6.	I	think	when	two	people	strongly	disagree,	one	of	them	will	have	to	give	in
eventually	if	they	want	to	preserve	the	relationship.

7.	I	avoid	getting	too	interdependent	with	anyone	—	like	in	a	committed
relationship	or	a	business	partnership.

8.	I	get	upset	when	someone	I	respect	disagrees	with	me.

How	 skilled	 are	 you	 at	 holding	 your	 own	 viewpoint	 in	 the	 face	 of	 strong
opposition?	 Do	 you	 welcome	 or	 avoid	 situations	 that	 force	 you	 to	 confront
differences?	 If	 you	 scored	 mostly	 3’s,	 4’s,	 and	 5’s,	 you	 probably	 need	 more
practice	with	this	truth	skill.

It	takes	more	than	one	blind	man	to	“see”	the	whole	elephant!

In	 my	 experience	 as	 a	 consultant	 and	 coach	 to	 business	 leaders	 and
entrepreneurs,	I	have	found	that	it	is	not	just	the	timid	who	have	trouble	holding
differences.	As	the	head	of	a	multibillion-dollar	company	once	said	to	me:	“Why
do	you	think	I	started	my	own	company?	So	I	can	tell	people	what	to	do!	So	I
can	get	my	own	way	all	the	time!”	I	know	this	comment	was	offered	somewhat
tongue	 in	 cheek,	 but	 I	 think	 it’s	 partially	 true	 for	many	 leaders.	They	 get	 into
positions	of	power	so	they	can	avoid	dealing	with	conflict.	Of	course,	what	you
avoid	in	life	has	a	way	of	coming	back	to	bite	you	in	the	backside.	That’s	what
these	 executives	 eventually	 discover.	 The	 more	 you	 try	 to	 avoid	 conflict	 the
more	havoc	it	plays	with	your	well-laid	plans.
At	 some	 point	 we	 learn	 to	 accept	 diversity	 as	 a	 fact	 of	 life.	While	 human

beings	 do	 have	 similar	 basic	 needs,	 we	 each	 view	 the	 world	 from	 our	 own
unique	 angle	 or	 perspective.	This	 uniqueness	 is	 our	 contribution	 to	 the	 human
story.	It’s	what	we	have	to	teach	one	another.

We’re	All	Conflict	Challenged

Most	 people	 have	 learned	 to	 mask	 the	 ways	 in	 which	 they	 differ	 from	 the
social	norm.	When	you	were	a	child	and	dependent	on	adults	for	your	survival,
you	may	have	learned	that	it’s	not	safe	to	be	too	different.	Maybe	the	grown-ups
ridiculed	you	or	tried	to	get	you	to	conform.	So	you	decided	that	it	was	best	to
keep	your	most	 original	 and	unique	views	 to	yourself.	As	 children	most	 of	 us



learned	 that	 the	 big	 people	 are	 usually	 right,	 and	 the	 little	 people	 are	 usually
wrong.	So	if	you	still	unconsciously	see	yourself	as	little,	your	behavior	may	be
governed	by	the	false	belief	that	if	you	express	your	view	and	it’s	different	from
someone	else’s,	his	view	will	win,	so	it’s	best	just	to	avoid	the	whole	situation.
Instead	 of	 holding	 the	 difference	 between	 your	 two	 perspectives,	 you	 just
conform	or	pretend	to	agree.	It’s	safer	that	way.

While	human	beings	do	have	similar	basic	needs,	we	each
view	the	world	from	our	own	unique	angle	or	perspective.
This	uniqueness	is	our	contribution	to	the	human	story.	It’s
what	we	have	to	teach	one	another.

Getting	Real	is	a	cooperative	project.	We’re	all	conflict	challengedy	to	some
degree.	Each	person	who,	admits	it	and	goes	about	learning	to	hold	differences
without	making	either	party	wrong	contributes	to	healing	our	collective	wound.
The	only	way	the	world	will	ever	be	a	safe	place	to	express	our	full	uniqueness
is	if	we	can	learn	together	that	your	view	need	not	pose	a	threat	to	mine.

The	only	way	the	world	will	ever	be	a	safe	place	to	express
our	full	uniqueness	is	if	we	can	learn	together	that	your	view
need	not	pose	a	threat	to	mine.

From	Despair	to	Unity

I’d	 like	 to	 tell	 you	 about	 an	 experience	 I	 had	 a	 few	weeks	 ago	 at	 a	 ten-day
silent	 Vipassana	 meditation	 retreat.	 The	 experience	 showed	 me	 not	 only	 that
your	view	need	not	pose	a	threat	to	mine	but	also	that	all	views	are	part	of	one
unified	 whole	 when	 seen	 with	 enough	 perspective.	 It	 also	 reminded	 me	 that
when	you	go	completely	and	with	awareness	 into	whatever	pain	you	might	be
feeling,	it	can	lead	you	to	another	level	of	consciousness.
On	the	eighth	day	of	the	retreat,	after	we	had	been	sitting	in	meditation	for	an

hour,	 my	 teacher	 suggested	 that	 some	 of	 us	 might	 want	 to	 do	 a	 standing
meditation	for	the	next	hour	of	the	scheduled	“sit.”	I	chose	to	take	the	standing



posture	at	that	point.	After	standing	for	about	ten	minutes,	I	began	to	sense	what
I	can	only	call	an	ancient	memory	of	myself	as	a	primitive,	aboriginal	being.	I
was	 simply	 standing	 there,	 in	 a	 state	 of	 wonder	 and	 innocence,	 all	 the	 while
repeating	 the	 mantra	 that	 my	 teacher	 had	 given	 me	 to	 work	 with	 on	 that
occasion.	Then	I	heard	the	sounds	of	an	airplane	flying	over	our	retreat	center.
As	I	stood	there,	so	open	and	sensitive,	it	seemed	as	if	I	could	smell	some	of	the
air	pollution	that	was	raining	down	on	earth	from	the	plane’s	exhaust.
Listening	to	these	sounds,	breathing	consciously,	and	repeating	my	mantra,	I

began	to	experience	a	sharp	pain	around	my	heart.	As	I	focused	on	it,	 the	pain
radiated	outward	to	my	entire	torso.	I	felt	like	doubling	over,	but	I	did	not.	I	just
stood	there.	The	pain	continued	as	I	listened	to	the	airplane	overhead.	Finally,	I
could	contain	 it	no	 longer,	and	 I	burst	 into	deeply	 felt	 sobs	—	sobbing	 for	 the
pain	of	the	earth	and	its	people,	for	the	ways	we	are	polluting	our	own	sources	of
food	and	water	and	air.	The	sounds	of	my	sobbing	filled	the	meditation	hall,	as
the	other	meditators	continued	quietly	with	their	practice.	Then	I	heard	another
plane	overhead,	and	the	pain	became	even	more	intense.	I	cried	out	in	my	pain.
It	was	almost	more	than	my	body	could	bear.	I	felt	what	could	only	be	described
in	 human	 terms	 as	 despair	—	 complete	 hopelessness	 and	 helplessness.	 There
was	nothing	I	could	do	and	nothing	to	be	done	to	change	what	is.	All	I	could	do
was	feel	and	express	what	I	felt.	And	all	the	while	I	was	standing	in	that	warrior-
like	posture,	feet	firmly	on	the	ground,	knees	slightly	bent,	spine	erect.
After	about	twenty	or	thirty	minutes	of	deep	sobbing,	I	heard	a	third	plane	fly

over	 us.	 This	 time,	 as	 I	 let	 the	 engine’s	 sounds	 enter	 me,	 still	 sensing	 the
pollution	raining	down	on	all	of	us,	I	felt	as	if	one	being	polluted.	I	were	on	that
plane.	I	could	be	on	a	business	trip,	wearing	a	suit,	sitting	there	working	on	my
laptop	computer.	I	was	the	polluter	as	well	as	the	one	being	polluted.	My	crying
eased	as	 I	 listened	further	 to	 the	sounds	of	 the	world	outside,	 the	music	of	 the
spheres.	I	heard	a	bird	chirping.	And	I	sensed	a	oneness	with	that	bird.	I	heard
dogs	 barking,	 and	 I	 became	 those	 dogs.	 Another	 plane	 flew	 over,	 and	 I	 felt
myself	expand	to	embrace	all	these	creatures,	natural	and	unnatural,	animate	and
inanimate.	 As	 I	 stood	 in	 the	 hall,	 still	 repeating	 my	 mantra	 and	 breathing
consciously,	my	emotions	grew	calmer.	Yet	my	physical	self	was	vibrating	at	a
level	that	I	had	never	experienced	before.	I	was	buzzing,	tingling,	humming	at	a
very	 refined,	 yet	 intense,	 level.	This	 experience	was	beyond	words,	 as	 all	 real
experiences	 are.	 I	 felt	 so	 expanded.	 I	 felt	 whole.	 When	 the	 gong	 sounded
signaling	that	the	“sit”	was	over,	I	lay	down	on	the	floor	to	rest.	As	I	lay	there
my	body	was	vibrating	in	such	a	way	that	I	actually	felt	myself	levitating	off	the



floor	 slightly.	 I	 imagine	 that	 if	 someone	 could	 have	weighed	my	 body	 at	 that
point,	I	would	have	weighed	less	than	my	usual	weight.

I	was	the	polluter	as	well	as	the	one	being	polluted

In	 this	 experience	 I	 embraced	 paradox	 as	 an	 aspect	 of	 human	 existence.
Within	 myself	 I	 held	 the	 difference,	 or	 contained	 the	 tension,	 between	 the
polluters	and	those	suffering	from	the	pollution.	There	was	no	one	out	 there	at
whom	to	point	the	finger	of	blame.	I	can	still	recall	vividly	the	pain	in	my	heart,
in	 my	 emotional	 body.	 But	 afterward	 there	 was	 also	 an	 expansiveness	 to	 the
sensation.	 It	 became	 a	 tension	 I	 expanded	 with	 instead	 of	 contracting	 into.	 I
experienced	 how,	when	 you	 hold	 differences	 between	 two	 seemingly	 opposite
poles	 or	 positions,	 your	 consciousness	 actually	 expands,	 and	 you	 become	 a
“bigger”	person.

When	you	hold	differences	between	two	seemingly	opposite
poles	or	positions,	your	consciousness	actually	expands,	and
you	become	a	“bigger”	person.

Contact-Withdrawal	Exercise

In	 my	 Getting	 Real	 workshops,	 many	 of	 the	 learning	 activities	 focus	 on
becoming	 aware	 of	 people’s	 differing	 contact-withdrawal	 rhythms	—	 the	 fact
that	 in	 any	 relationship,	 at	 any	 given	 moment,	 one	 person	 may	 feel	 like
withdrawing	when	the	other	feels	like	being	in	contact.	Here	is	an	exercise	you
can	try	with	a	partner.
Sit	facing	your	partner.	Close	your	eyes	and	focus	your	attention	inward	for	a

while.	Then,	when	you	are	ready,	focus	your	attention	outward	on	your	partner
and	make	 nonverbal	 contact	 in	whatever	 form	 feels	 authentic.	Remember	 that
the	level	and	pacing	of	contact	that	feels	good	to	one	person	is	usually	different
from	what	 feels	 right	 to	 the	other.	Any	 two	people	are	 likely	 to	have	different
rhythms	regarding	when	they	feel	like	being	in	contact	and	when	they	feel	like
focusing	their	attention	inward.



Continue	 to	 face	each	other,	paying	attention	 to	when	you	feel	 like	being	 in
contact	 and	when	 you	 feel	 like	withdrawing	 your	 focus	 inward.	Make	 it	 your
goal	 to	 be	 as	 true	 as	 possible	 to	 your	 own	 rhythms	—	 staying	 in	 contact	 or
available	when	you	feel	like	it	regardless	of	what	the	other	person	is	doing	and
withdrawing	into	yourself	whenever	you	feel	like	it,	even	if	the	other	appears	to
want	contact.	Remain	face-to-face,	with	eyes	open	or	closed	depending	on	your
feeling	 at	 the	moment,	 and	 follow	 your	 own	 flow	 of	 contact	 and	withdrawal.
After	the	exercise,	when	people	share	their	thoughts,	feelings,	and	observations
about	 the	exercise,	many	notice	how	much	easier	 it	 is	 to	“be	 themselves”	with
their	 eyes	 closed.	 They	 also	mention	 how	 challenging	 it	 is	 to	 withdraw	 from
their	partner	when	the	partner	seems	to	want	contact	and	how	hard	it	is	to	stay	in
contact	when	 the	other	 is	 pulling	 away.	The	human	ego	has	 a	 tendency	 to	 see
differing	wants	as	a	problem,	rather	 than	as	simply	what	 is.	People	attach	way
too	much	meaning	to	the	simple	phenomenon	of	differing	rhythms.	The	purpose
of	 the	 contact-withdrawal	 exercise	 is	 to	 demonstrate	 that	 people	 can	 allow
themselves	 to	experience	a	difference	 in	contact	 rhythms	without	any	 threat	 to
their	present	well-being.

Active	Listening

Everyone	 knows	 how	 important	 it	 is	 to	 listen	 —	 to	 take	 in	 what	 another
person	is	saying	and	to	let	her	know	she	is	being	heard.	Holding	differences	is	a
kind	 of	 advanced	 listening.	To	 practice	 this	 truth	 skill,	 you	 need	 to	 be	 able	 to
listen	to	things	you’d	rather	not	hear,	things	that	challenge	your	point	of	view,	or
even	things	that	push	your	buttons.
Holding	 differences	 depends	 on	 your	 ability	 to	 assert	 your	 boundaries.	You

know	what	you	feel	and	want	and	value,	and	you	don’t	 let	anybody	mess	with
those	 things	 unless	 you	 so	 choose.	 This	 allows	 you	 to	 both	 have	 your	 own
experience	 and	 to	 be	 open	 to	 alternative	 views.	 You	 can	 consider	 more
information	all	at	once	without	getting	confused.	You	can	actually	hold	several
perspectives	 in	your	mind	and	consider	 them	simultaneously	and	 in	 relation	 to
one	 another.	 Doing	 this	 deepens	 your	 intuitive	 decision	 making	 and	 creative
problem	 solving,	 because	 it	 catapults	 you	 out	 of	 the	 limitations	 of	 dualistic,
black-and-white	thinking.
I	mentioned	 active	 listening	 in	 chapter	 5	 when	 I	 talked	 about	 how	 to	 keep

yourself	from	overreacting	to	feedback.	When	you	practice	active	listening,	you



discipline	yourself	to	pay	attention	by	repeating	back	to	the	speaker	what	he	has
just	 said.	 This	 is	 the	 best	 tool	 I	 know	 for	 developing	 the	 ability	 to	 hold
differences.	I	offer	an	example	of	how	this	works	in	the	following	interaction.

Holding	Differences	at	Work

Jake	 is	 asking	 his	 supervisor,	Mory,	 for	 a	 raise.	Mory	 learned	 about	 active
listening	in	a	communications	seminar	he	took	last	year.	Jake,	on	the	other	hand,
has	never	heard	of	active	listening.	When	Mory	learns	Jake’s	agenda,	he	knows
he	had	better	start	out	listening	actively	so	that	he	won’t	react	too	quickly	and	so
that	he’ll	really	be	able	to	listen	to	what	Jake	has	to	say.

Jake:	I’ve	been	working	for	you	for	four	years,	and	I’m	still	making	$25	an	hour.
I	 think	 I’m	 the	best	mechanic	on	 the	 fleet.	And	 I	know	 for	 a	 fact	 some	of	 the
other	guys	make	the	same	as	me.
Mory:	You’re	thinking	you’ve	been	here	four	years	and	are	still	working	for	$25
an	 hour	 and	 that	 others,	 who	 aren’t	 as	 valuable	 to	 the	 company	 as	 you,	 are
getting	the	same	pay.	Did	I	hear	you	right?
Jake:	Yeah.	I	think	I’m	worth	more	money.
Mory:	You	think	you	deserve	more	money.	And	you’re	hoping
I	think	so	too	—	is	that	right?	Okay,	now	can	I	tell	you	how	I	see	it?
Jake:	Sure.
Mory:	 I	see	your	point	of	view,	and	I	appreciate	you	for	coming	to	 talk	 to	me.
I’m	 sympathetic	 to	 what	 you	 said.	 I	 think	 you	 are	 worth	 more	 than	 you’re
getting.	At	 the	same	time,	 I’m	seeing	a	different	part	of	 the	picture.	 I’d	 like	 to
tell	you	what’s	up	for	me	these	days.
Jake:	Yeah,	go	ahead.
Mory:	 As	 the	 general	 manager,	 I’m	 feeling	 a	 lot	 of	 pressure	 from	 the
competition.	 I’m	afraid	 if	 I	spend	any	more	on	salaries,	 the	company	won’t	be
able	to	put	the	amount	of	money	we	need	into	new	advertising	that	we	need	to
do	 to	 stay	 competitive.	 I	 know	 you’re	 worth	 more	 than	 you’re	 getting.	 I	 just
haven’t	figured	out	how	to	give	you	what	you	deserve	and	still	have	my	budget
work	over	the	long	haul.
Jake:	Is	there	anything	I	can	do	to	help	with	what	you’re	talking	about?
Mory:	You’re	 thinking	maybe	you	can	help?	Well,	 I	don’t	know.	Let	me	 think
about	that.



Mory	goes	away	and	reflects	on	the	conversation.	He	lets	both	Jake’s	words	and
his	own	rattle	around	in	his	brain	for	a	while.	He	remembers	Jake’s	question,	“Is
there	anything	I	can	do	to	help?”	That	night	he	has	an	idea	just	as	he	is	falling
off	 to	 sleep:	 he	 envisions	 all	 the	mechanics	 helping	 to	 bring	 in	 customers.	He
develops	a	plan	 for	how	they	can	help	 the	company	stay	competitive	 in	a	way
that	 is	unusual	but	not	unrealistic.	The	next	day	he	 tries	 this	 idea	out	on	 Jake,
asking	 if	 he	 would	 be	 willing	 to	 participate	 in	 a	 word-of-mouth	 advertising
campaign.	Jake	likes	the	idea.	They	spend	some	time	fleshing	out	a	plan	to	bring
to	the	other	mechanics.	In	the	end,	Mory	is	able	to	cut	down	on	his	advertising
budget	 due	 to	 the	 expanded	 public-relations	 role	 of	 his	 employees.	 They	 all
decide	 that	 those	 who	 participate	 most	 effectively	 in	 the	 new	 plan	 will	 earn
either	raises	or	bonuses	as	a	result	of	their	increased	efforts.	This	would	enable
Jake	to	get	the	raise	he	was	seeking.
This	 example	 shows	how	when	 two	people	with	opposing	 interests	 listen	 to

each	other,	a	win-win	solution	can	often	be	found.	Mory	used	active	listening	to
hold	the	difference	between	his	view	and	Jake’s.	He	really	listened	to	Jake,	even
when	 doing	 so	was	 uncomfortable.	At	 the	 same	 time	 he	 held	 true	 to	 his	 own
point	of	view.	After	considering	both	views,	he	found	that	something	Jake	said
had	given	him	an	idea	for	how	both	people’s	needs	might	be	met.

Active	listening	builds	mutual	understanding	and	often
provides	the	information	needed	for	discovering	mutually
beneficial	solutions.	The	goodwill	created	generates	creative
energy	—	in	contrast	to	the	mistrust	and	withholding	of
information	that	occurs	in	most	situations	where	there	is	a
conflict	of	interests.

Active	 listening	 builds	 mutual	 understanding	 and	 often	 provides	 the
information	needed	for	discovering	mutually	beneficial	solutions.	The	goodwill
created	generates	creative	energy	—	in	contrast	to	the	mistrust	and	withholding
of	information	that	occurs	in	most	situations	where	there	is	a	conflict	of	interests.

Holding	Differences	in	Marriage

Paula	is	fifty.	Paul	is	forty-six.	They	have	been	married	for	ten	years.	This	is



the	 second	marriage	 for	 both.	When	 they	 first	 got	 together,	 they	 agreed	 to	 be
monogamous,	but	 now	 things	have	 changed.	Paul	believes	he	has	 “only	 a	 few
good	 years	 left”	 in	 terms	 of	 his	 sexual	 vitality.	 He	 has	 only	 had	 four	 sexual
partners	in	his	life,	and	he’s	feeling	a	need	to	experiment	with	other	lovers.	He
also	has	the	idea	that	being	monogamous	is	killing	his	passion	and	his	sense	of
vitality	as	a	man.	He	sincerely	believes	that	it	is	dishonest	for	him	to	pretend	to
be	satisfied	with	just	one	sex	partner.	He	loves	Paula	and	enjoys	what	he	and	she
have	 together,	 but	 he	 keeps	 noticing	 his	 sexual	 attention	 being	 drawn	 toward
other	women.
Paula	is	beside	herself	with	grief	and	anger.	She	wants	to	stay	monogamous.

She	believes	that	sex	is	a	sacred	act,	and	she	has	not	had	any	desire	to	be	with
other	sex	partners.	They	have	arrived	at	a	true	impasse.	Paul	feels	strongly	that
he	 cannot	 be	 true	 to	 himself	 and	 stay	 monogamous.	 He	 also	 feels	 genuine
empathy	for	Paula.	It	hurts	him	to	see	her	in	pain.	Paula	imagines	that	if	Paul	has
sex	with	other	women,	 she	will	not	be	able	 to	be	as	open	and	vulnerable	with
him.	 She	 trusts	 what	 Paul	 says	 about	 himself	 —	 that	 he	 feels	 dishonest
pretending	to	be	monogamous.	She	wants	Paul	to	have	what	he	wants,	and	at	the
same	 time,	 she	 thinks	 she’d	be	untrue	 to	herself	 staying	 in	 a	nonmonogamous
relationship.	Paul	wants	Paula	to	feel	safe	and	open	with	him.

If	you	can	stay	in	the	impasse	for	enough	time,	allowing	the
difference	to	exist	rather	than	rushing	prematurely	to	a
resolution,	you	will	be	changed	by	the	experience.	This	change
is	not	predictable.	It	doesn’t	take	the	form	of	giving	in	or
compromising	but	rather	of	expanding	yourself.

If	you	were	Paul	or	Paula,	can	you	imagine	how	you	might	experience	such	a
predicament?	 Can	 you	 imagine	 feeling	 two	 contradictory	 things	 at	 once:	 the
wish	to	have	what	you	want	alongside	the	wish	for	your	partner	to	have	what	he
or	she	wants?	This	is	what	it	feels	like	to	hold	differences.	It’s	like	hanging	out
in	 an	 unresolved	 predicament	 without	 knowing	 if	 there	 will	 be	 a	 resolution.
Some	people	can’t	stand	the	tension,	so	they	jump	to	a	premature	conclusion	—
like	“I’m	out	of	here”	or	“I	know	I’m	not	being	fair	 to	you,	so	I’ll	 just	 leave.”
Yet	sometimes	when	you	do	stay	with	your	experience,	you	get	to	a	deeper	level
of	what	the	conflict	is	really	about.	It	can	be	intensely	painful,	but	I	have	found
that	 if	 a	 couple	 can	 stay	 with	 their	 pain,	 with	 awareness,	 just	 as	 I	 have



recommended	that	individuals	stay	with	their	pain,	a	breakthrough	will	occur.	If
you	 can	 stay	 in	 the	 impasse	 for	 enough	 time,	 allowing	 the	 difference	 to	 exist
rather	 than	 rushing	 prematurely	 to	 a	 resolution,	 you	 will	 be	 changed	 by	 the
experience.	This	change	is	not	predictable.	It	doesn’t	take	the	form	of	giving	in
or	compromising	but	rather	of	expanding	yourself.
In	Paul	and	Paula’s	case,	after	they	had	stayed	with	their	pain	and	uncertainty

for	 about	 six	 months,	 they	 both	 stated	 that	 they	 felt	 transformed	 by	 the
experience:	 Paul	 discovered	 that	 his	 need	 for	 other	 lovers	 was	 actuaUy
connected	 to	 some	unresolved	anger	both	 at	Paula	 and	at	 his	mother.	After	he
was	 able	 to	 express	 his	 anger	 to	 both	women	 and	 to	 get	 over	 it,	 Paul	 shared:
What	 I	 thought	 I	 needed	 for	my	 survival	 doesn’t	 seem	 so	 crucial	 now.”	Paula
also	got	a	deeper	look	at	herself	after	staying	with	her	pain	about	the	situation.
She	 remembered	 a	 time	 early	 in	 the	 marriage	 when	 Paul	 broke	 one	 of	 his
agreements	with	her	—	an	agreement	that	had	to	do	with	money,	not	sex.	After
she	cleared	 this	up	with	Paul,	by	expressing	her	 resentment,	 she	 then	saw	 that
“breaking	 agreements”	 had	 been	 a	 button	 for	 her	 all	 her	 life.	 She	 did	 some
crying	 and	 grieving	 for	 some	 of	 the	 disappointments	 she	 had	 felt	 as	 a	 child.
Afterward,	she	was	finally	free	enough	of	old	baggage	to	say	truthfully,	“I	feel	a
lot	safer,	like	my	security	doesn’t	depend	on	other	people,	like	I’ll	be	okay	if	the
relationship	ends,	even	though	I	still	very	much	want	to	be	with	Paul.”

For	many	couples	just	staying	in	the	impasse,	holding	their
differences	for	a	period	of	time,	produces	an	inner	expansion
or	transformation	that	enables	them	to	experience	a	deeper
level	of	what’s	real	for	each	of	them.

Outcomes	like	this	often	feel	magical	or	unbelievable	to	the	people	involved
—	 when	 they	 consider	 where	 they	 were	 before	 they	 got	 unstuck.	 For	 many
couples	just	staying	in	the	impasse,	holding	their	differences	for	a	period	of	time,
produces	an	inner	expansion	or	transformation	that	enables	them	to	experience	a
deeper	 level	 of	 what’s	 real	 for	 each	 of	 them.	 I	 have	 seen	 this	 type	 of	 inner
transformation	occur	many	times	in	my	career	as	a	counselor	and	coach.	I	have
come	to	fully	trust	the	process	that	occurs	when	you	let	yourself	simply	hang	out
with	uncertainty.	The	result	is	well	worth	it.



Staying	Present	Exercise

To	 help	 you	 experience	 holding	 differences,	 find	 someone	 with	 whom	 you
have	 unfinished	 business	 to	 do	 this	 exercise	 with	 you.	 Pair	 up	 and	 face	 each
other.	 Partner	 A	 opens	 the	 dialogue	 by	 sharing	 a	 resentment	 about	 the	 other
partner	(using	the	sentence	structure,	“I	resent	you	for...”	and	then	sharing	bodily
sensations,	 self-talk,	 or	 anything	 else	 related	 to	 the	 resentment.)	 Partner	 B
actively	 listens	 and	 then,	 when	 his	 partner	 says	 she	 is	 satisfied	 with	 how	 he
listened	to	her,	shares	what	he	is	experiencing	right	in	the	moment.	He	does	not
respond	 to	 the	content	of	her	message,	unless	he	 frames	 it	as	his	 self-talk.	His
experience	can	be	whatever	he	feels,	thinks,	or	says	to	himself	after	hearing	what
A	said.	Partner	A	actively	 listens	and	 then	shares	her	present	experience.	They
keep	going	back	and	forth	like	this	for	five	to	ten	minutes.	Here’s	an	example:

Frank:	I	resent	you	for	staying	home	every	day,	for	not	having	a	job	that	brings
in	money.	I	feel	a	tightness	in	my	jaw	and	in	my	throat.	And	my	self-talk,	or	my
judgment,	is	you’re	taking	it	easy	while	I	bust	my	fanny	supporting	us.
Nora:	You	resent	me	for	not	having	a	paying	job.	Your	jaw	and	throat	are	tight.
And	your	self-talk	is	 that	I	have	it	easy	while	you	bust	your	buns.	Is	 that	what
you	said?	(Frank	nods.)	Okay.	I	resent	you	for	saying	I	have	an	easy	life.	I	feel
that	in	my	face,	and	in	my	arms	and	hands.	They’re	tense.	Frank:	You	resent	me
for	saying	you	have	an	easy	life.	Your	face	and	arms	and	hands	feel	tense.	Did	I
hear	you	correctly?	(Nora	nods.)	And	I	resent	you	for	not	offering	to	go	out	and
get	 a	 job.	And	 I	 didn’t	 say	 you	 have	 an	 easy	 life.	 I	 said	my	 self-	 talk	 is	 that
you’re	taking	it	easy.
Nora:	You’re	saying	you	resent	me	for	not	offering	to	go	to	work.	Did	I	get	it?
Frank:	There	was	one	other	thing	I	said:	I	didn’t	say	you	have	an	easy	life.	My
self-talk	was	that	you’re	taking	it	easy.	I	imagine	you’re	taking	it	easy.	Okay?
Nora:	 You	 didn’t	 say	 I	 have	 an	 easy	 life,	 you	 said	 I’m	 taking	 it	 easy...	 you
imagine.	Right?	 (Frank	 nods.)	And	 I’m	 feeling	 sad.	 I’m	 saying	 to	myself	 that
I’m	not	unwilling	to	go	to	work.	I’m	unsure	of	myself	in	the	arena	that	you’re	so
good	in.
Frank:	You’re	feeling	sad	and	you’re	thinking	that	you	don’t	have	confidence	in
your	ability	to	handle	a	job.	Is	that	right?	(She	nods.)	And	right	now	I’m	feeling
softer	toward	you.	I	can	feel	a	relaxation	in	my	belly	and	around	my	heart.
Nora:	 You	 say	 you’re	 feeling	 softer	 toward	 me.	 Yes?	 (He	 nods.)	 I	 feel	 the



tension	going	out	of	my	face,	and	I’m	feeling	a	little	bit	softer	and	more	relaxed
now	too.

In	 this	example,	Frank	and	Nora	started	out	resenting	each	other	and	ended	up
feeling	softer	toward	each	other.	Although	things	don’t	always	happen	this	way,
often	 they	 do.	 I	 have	 seen	 this	 sort	 of	 change	 happen	many	 times	 when	 two
people,	mated	or	not,	stay	present	to	what	the	other	has	just	said	and	share	their
here-and-now	response.	Paying	careful	attention	to	your	own	experience	and	to
each	other	allows	for	feelings	to	be	experienced	more	fully	so	that	they	can	be
released.	Paying	attention	also	builds	a	sense	of	intimacy	or	connection	—	even
if	the	disagreement	still	exists.	Married	couples,	note	this	point	well!

Paying	attention	also	builds	a	sense	of	intimacy	or	connection
—	even	if	the	disagreement	still	exists.	Married	couples,	note
this	point	well!

If	you	are	in	a	relationship	with	a	long	history	of	conflict,	it	would	be	a	good
idea	to	do	this	exercise	with	another	person	or	pair	observing.	Having	a	witness
or	 witnesses	 helps	 you	 stay	 with	 the	 exercise,	 which	 can	 be	 very	 difficult.
Couples	 are	 so	 used	 to	 bypassing	 their	 present	 experience	 and	 going
immediately	into	their	interpretations,	stereotypes,	knee-jerk	reactions,	and	self-
protective	judgments	about	each	other.	It’s	highly	unusual	for	people	to	simply
share	 their	 present	 experience.	 Frank	 and	 Nora’s	 conversation	 took	 place
between	real	person	and	real	person	instead	of	between	one’s	interpretation	and
the	other’s	interpretation.	The	latter	would	look	more	like	this:	“You	don’t	care
about	 my	 needs.	 I’ve	 told	 you	 a	 hundred	 times	 what	 I	 want.”	 (This	 is	 an
interpretation	followed	by	a	generalization.	He	can’t	really	know	what	she	does
or	does	not	care	about.)	“Well,	you	don’t	care	about	my	needs	either!	You	never
treat	me	with	respect.”	(Another	interpretation	and	another	generalization.)	Does
this	sound	familiar?	Well,	if	you’ve	ever	been	married	for	any	length	of	time,	I’ll
bet	 it	does!	Mates	who	have	been	 together	 for	 a	while	 tend	 to	camouflage	 the
really	 painful	 unfinished	 situations	 by	 making	 interpretations,	 generalizations,
comparisons,	 and	 assessments.	 They	 apparently	 hope	 that	 this	 sort	 of	 more
distant,	less	intimate,	language	will	keep	them	a	safe	distance	from	the	pain.



Mates	who	have	been	together	for	a	while	tend	to	camouflage
the	really	painful	unfinished	situations	by	making
interpretations,	generalizations,	comparisons,	and
assessments.

Holding	differences	trains	you	to	tolerate	more	intensity	of	feeling,	whether	it
be	painful	or	pleasurable.	As	a	practice	it	helps	you	stay	with	the	discomfort,	and
stay	with	noticing	your	experience,	until	clarity	is	reached.	It	also	helps	partners
discover	what	is	real	for	each	other,	instead	of	getting	caught	up	defending	their
interpretations	and	stereotypes.	Using	active	listening	with	the	intent	of	staying
in	your	experience	is	a	very	effective	tool	for	helping	you	stick	to	what	is,	rather
than	escaping	into	explanations	or	defensiveness.

Holding	Differences	in	a	Nutshell

•	Differences	in	viewpoint	or	desires	are	inevitable.	Learning	to	allow	the
differences	to	exist	is	a	good	starting	place	for	healing	between	people.

•	Holding	differences	gives	you	the	capacity	to	accept	that	differences	do	exist.
When	you	learn	to	hold	two	apparently	conflicting	views	side	by	side,	the
difference	doesn’t	seem	so	threatening,	your	view	expands,	and	often,	the
contradiction	vanishes.

•	Active	listening	is	one	of	the	best	communication	tools	for	learning	to	hold
differences.	Another	good	tool	is	observing,	with	awareness,	your	own	and
your	partner’s	differing	contact-withdrawal	rhythms.

•	When	you	accept	that	there	is	no	effective	way	to	control	what	another
thinks,	and	that	all	attempts	at	such	control	simply	introduce	static	into	your
communication,	then	you	are	better	prepared	to	deal	with	diversity.	You	can
start	to	value	being	honest	about	disagreements	and	diverse	perspectives	—
because	of	what	you	can	learn	from	other	people.

•	Once	you	learn	to	embrace	paradox,	you	see	that	“all	is	one,”	that	everything
that	exists	is	part	of	a	great	universal	oneness.

•	Life	becomes	a	painful	battle	when	you	struggle	against	what	is,	including
differences	in	perceptions	and	styles	of	relating.	We	create	unnecessary
suffering	when	we	cannot	accept	our	differences	from	others	and	the
seemingly	contradictory	impulses	within	ourselves.	I’ll	address	the	apparent



contradictions	in	our	inner	world	in	the	next	chapter.



CHAPTER	10
SHARING	MIXED	EMOTIONS

YOU’RE	NOT	CRAZY,
YOU’RE	COMPLEX

If	you	have	read	this	far,	by	now	you	have	probably	thought	of	someone	you
haven’t	been	completely	honest	with.	I	know	I	have!	So	take	the	time	to
contemplate:	How	do	you	feel	as	you	anticipate	telling	her	something	that	might
be	difficult	to	express?	Do	you	notice	any	mixed	feelings	—	such	as	a	desire	to
express	your	feelings	and	at	the	same	time	a	fear	about	her	reaction?	In	my	case,
a	friend	and	former	business	partner	comes	to	mind.	I	want	to	tell	him	I	resent
him	for	not	paying	me	the	money	he	owes	me,	but	my	mind	warns	me	that	I
could	lose	his	friendship	if	I	upset	him.	This	second	thought	effectively	stops	my
energy	flow.	Now,	mind	you,	I	know	I	will	have	this	conversation	with	him,	but
even	after	all	these	years	of	practicing	the	ten	truth	skills	and	knowing	how	well
they	work,	I	still	have	fearful	thoughts	sometimes.	In	this	case,	my	mixed
feelings	are	I	feel	my	anger,	and	I	also	notice	a	hesitation	that	I	call	fear.	I	fear
that	if	I	tell	him	my	resentment,	he	might	cut	off	communication	with	me.	What
do	I	do?	Do	I	speak	up	or	shut	up?
Well,	 I’m	 sure	 you	 have	 guessed	 from	 the	 title	 of	 this	 chapter	 that	 my

recommendation	is	to	express	both	things,	if	you	really	are	feeling	both.	Practice
truth	skill	#9!	I	do	not	recommend	disclosing	your	fear	as	a	strategy	for	getting
the	 other	 person’s	 sympathy.	 If	 you’re	 being	manipulative,	 you	won’t	 get	 to	 a
feeling	 of	 completion	 about	 the	 issue,	 because	 a	 manipulation	 is	 not	 an
expression	 of	 your	 present	 foreground;	 rather,	 it’s	 a	 strategy	 focused	 on	 the
future.
As	I	imagine	how	the	conversation	with	my	friend	might	start	out,	here’s	what

I	envision:	“Bob,	I	have	some	unfinished	business	to	clear	up	with	you.	Are	you
available	 for	 this	 conversation?	 Okay,	 good.	 I	 have	 a	 resentment	 I	 want	 to
express,	and	now	I’m	aware	that	I’m	also	feeling	something	like	fear,	a	fluttering



sensation	 in	my	stomach.	 I	 think	 the	 fear	 is	about	 the	 fact	 that	 I	don’t	want	 to
lose	your	friendship,	and	I	want	to	let	you	know	about	this	resentment	because
by	not	expressing	it,	I’m	finding	it	hard	to	be	around	you.	I	resent	you	for	saying
you’d	pay	me	the	$10,000	you	owe	me	and	then	not	paying	it.	I	really	resent	you
for	that.	And	I’m	still	feeling	some	fear,	but	less.	I	resent	you	for	not	paying	me
the	money	you	owe	me."
That’s	it.	Afterward	I	would	check	in	with	how	I	felt	and	share	that	 too.	If	I

still	 felt	unfinished,	I’d	repeat	my	resentment	or	say	it	a	different	way.	If	I	 felt
complete,	I’d	tell	him	that.	Then	I’d	see	if	he	had	any	response.	I’d	listen	to	it
and	then	share	whatever	I	felt	after	that	—	resentment,	appreciation,	and	so	on.

Self-Assessment	Quiz

The	following	quiz	will	help	you	see	how	skilled	you	are	at	expressing	mixed
emotions.	For	each	statement,	rate	yourself	from	1	to	5,	with	1	being	generally
not	true	of	you	and	5	being	generally	true.

1.	I	believe	it	is	always	better	to	have	one	clear	feeling	than	two	feelings	at	the
same	time.

2.	I	try	to	avoid	feeling	confused.
3.	I	get	impatient	with	other	people	who	say	they	feel	one	thing	then	right
away	say	they	also	feel	another.

4.	It	would	bother	me	if	people	thought	of	me	as	uncertain	or	unsure	of	myself.
5.	If	I	had	to	reprimand	or	discipline	someone	that	I	loved,	I’d	try	to	keep	a
stiff	upper	lip	and	refrain	from	showing	them	my	softer,	caring	feelings.

If	you	scored	several	3’s,	4’s,	and	5’s,	you	may	hold	such	a	strong	belief	about
having	to	be	consistent	and	firm	that	you	may	not	allow	yourself	to	experience
the	 full	 range	 of	 your	 feelings.	 These	 types	 of	 beliefs	 often	 interfere	with	 our
ability	 to	perceive	what	we’re	actually	feeling,	because	we’re	so	busy	 thinking
we	shouldn’t	be	feeling	all	those	things	in	the	first	place.

Sharing	Mixed	Emotions	with	Family

Ken,	even	though	he	is	in	his	forties,	is	living	with	his	parents	while	he	gets
his	life	back	together	after	his	divorce.	His	mother’s	frequent	questioning	about



how	he’s	doing	and	where	he’s	going	 is	driving	him	nuts.	He	wants	 to	 tell	her
this	in	the	hopes	that	maybe	she’ll	become	aware	of	what	she’s	doing	and	stop	or
that	 he’ll	 feel	 less	 bothered	 once	 he	 expresses	what’s	 on	 his	mind.	He	 is	 also
very	grateful	to	his	mom	and	dad	for	opening	their	home	to	him	during	this	time
of	crisis.	He	imagines	he’d	sound	ungrateful	if	he	told	his	mom	how	much	her
behavior	bothers	him.	He	 is	genuinely	grateful;	and	her	questions	do	bug	him.
Both	 things	are	 true.	After	 attending	one	of	my	workshops	and	 learning	about
this	 truth	 skill,	 he	 thinks	 he	 has	 found	 a	 safe	way	 to	 speak	 honestly	with	 his
mom.	 He	 sees	 that	 he	 could	 try	 expressing	 all	 his	 various	 feelings	 —	 his
gratitude,	 his	 fear	 of	 hurting	 her,	 and	 his	 irritation	 about	 the	 frequency	 of	 her
questions.
What	 he	 decided	 to	 do	was	 this:	 the	 next	 time	his	mom’s	questions	 bugged

him,	he	would	take	the	time	to	identify	and	feel	his	feelings	instead	of	focusing
so	much	on	what	he	wished	 she	would	do	differently.	He	would	notice	 all	 his
feelings	 —	 the	 caring,	 appreciative	 feelings	 as	 well	 as	 the	 frustrated,	 angry
feelings.	He	would	also	notice	his	thoughts	about	having	any	of	those	feelings,
his	self-talk,	such	as,	“I	shouldn’t	be	so	ungrateful.”	Then	he	would	reflect	on	his
intent,	asking	himself,	“Am	I	wanting	to	clear	the	air	or	discover	how	she	feels
(relate)?	Or	am	I	wanting	 to	get	her	 to	stop	what	she’s	doing	or	make	her	 feel
bad	(control)?”	After	 this,	he	would	go	ahead	and	express	his	various	 thoughts
and	feelings,	all	strung	together	just	as	they	occurred	inside	him.	And	finally,	he
would	 be	 sure	 to	 listen	 to	 whatever	 his	 mom	 wanted	 to	 say	 in	 response.	 He
would	not	hit	and	run.	He	would	allow	her	feelings	to	affect	him	and	show	her
how	he	was	affected	through	his	response.

The	way	out	of	confusion	is	not	to	fight	it	but	to	allow	one	of
your	 several	 feelings	 to	 float	 to	 the	 foreground	 and	 be
expressed,	 even	 if	 you	 also	 feel	 something	 else	 in	 the
background.

When	Ken	reported	back	to	me	how	it	had	gone	with	his	mom,	he	expressed
surprise	that	she	did	not	fall	apart	after	hearing	his	feelings.	He	was	very	happy
and	proud	of	himself	 for	what	he	had	done	and	how	he	had	done	 it.	Ken	also
mentioned	that	since	the	confrontation	with	his	mom,	he	seemed	to	be	better	at
asserting	his	boundaries	with	his	girlfriend.	In	this	relationship,	he	also	needed	to
express	some	mixed	feelings	—	something	along	the	lines	of	“I	need	some	alone



time	right	now,	and	I	don’t	want	you	to	go	too	far	away."

It’s	Okay	to	Feel	Confused

A	workshop	participant,	Polly,	exclaimed,	“I’m	so	confused.	I	feel	 too	many
things	at	once.	I’d	better	just	shut	up	before	I	make	a	complete	fool	of	myself.”	I
often	 find	 myself	 reminding	 people	 like	 Polly	 that	 there	 is	 nothing	 shameful
about	feeling	confused.	Most	self-aware	people	experience	mixed	feelings	fairly
often.	 Confusion	 simply	 means	 that	 more	 than	 one	 thing	 is	 pulling	 on	 your
attention.	The	way	out	of	 confusion	 is	not	 to	 fight	 it	 but	 to	 allow	one	of	your
several	feelings	to	float	to	the	foreground	and	be	expressed,	even	if	you	also	feel
something	else	in	the	background.	Once	this	is	done,	see	what	emerges	next	in
your	 foreground,	 and	 express	 that.	 Usually	 when	 you	 express	 what’s	 in	 your
foreground,	the	way	is	cleared	for	the	next	“layer	of	the	onion”	to	be	expressed.
You	will	come	to	trust	this	process	if	you	can	simply	allow	it.	Don’t	use	the	fact
that	 you	 are	 confused	 or	 don’t	 know	 where	 to	 start	 as	 an	 excuse	 for	 not
expressing	yourself	at	all.

Don’t	use	the	fact	that	you	are	confused	or	don’t	know	where
to	start	as	an	excuse	for	not	expressing	yourself	at	all.

Sharing	Mixed	Emotions	with	Children

Lars	is	upset	because	his	fifteen-year-old	son,	Ted,	just	seriously	damaged	his
new	power	lawn	mower	while	cutting	the	grass.	In	fact,	Lars	is	furious,	because
money	is	tight	for	the	family	right	now,	yet	he	also	appreciates	Ted’s	intent	to	be
helpful	around	the	house.	Lars	knows	he	needs	to	confront	Ted	with	his	feelings.
But	which	feelings	—	the	anger	or	the	appreciation?
Why	 not	 both?	 Who	 says	 you	 can’t	 appreciate	 your	 son’s	 good	 intentions

while	 at	 the	 same	 time	being	 angry	 that	 he	 has	 damaged	 something?	The	 fact
that	 Lars	 can	 feel	 both	 his	 appreciation	 and	 his	 anger	 shows	 that	 he	 is
emotionally	mature	enough	to	hold	two	seemingly	conflicting	feelings	that	really
are	not	contradictory	at	all.	Both	make	sense	as	he	steps	back	and	 looks	at	 the
bigger	picture.	The	ability	to	do	this	means	that	Lars	isn’t	stuck	in	an	immediate



reaction.	 He	 has	 enough	 perspective	 on	 his	 reactions	 to	 realize	 that	 his	 first
impulse	may	not	be	the	whole	story.
So	Lars	tells	Ted,	“I	want	to	talk	to	you	about	what	happened	with	the	lawn

mower.”	Then,	after	asking	for	Ted’s	views	and	listening	to	what	he	has	to	say,
Lars	says,	“I	appreciate	you	for	volunteering	to	do	the	lawn.	I	like	that	you	are
helping	 out	more	 around	 here.	And	 I	 know	you	were	 trying	 to	 get	 it	 all	 done
before	 the	 rain.	So	 I	know	you	 felt	 some	 time	pressure.	And	 I	 also	 feel	 really
angry	and	upset	that	the	new	mower	now	needs	major	repairs.	I’m	angry	at	you
for	not	reading	the	instruction	manual	or	asking	me	for	help	before	you	started
work.”
Notice	that	Lars	did	not	say,	“I	appreciate	you,	but	I’m	also	angry.”	Using	the

word	 but	 in	 that	 context	 would	 have	 the	 effect	 of	 canceling	 whatever	 came
before.	He	used	and:	“I	appreciate	you	for	———	and	I	resent	you	for———.”
Using	and	 instead	of	but	 sends	 the	message	 that	both	parts	of	 the	sentence	are
true.	 There	 is	 great	 value	 in	 including	 both	 your	 feelings	 in	 one	 statement.
Sharing	both	can	give	your	statement	added	depth	and	genuineness.

Mixed	Feelings	in	Marriage

Another	type	of	situation	in	which	mixed	feelings	can	arise	is	when	you	feel
pain	 for	 someone	 else’s	 predicament	 and	 pain	 for	 yourself.	 Ava	 is	 the	 major
caregiver	for	her	disabled	husband,	Reese,	who	cannot	walk	and	spends	most	of
his	time	in	front	of	the	television	in	his	wheelchair.	Since	Reese’s	accident,	Ava
has	curtailed	most	of	her	social	life	to	work	full-time	and	care	for	her	husband.
As	the	months	since	the	accident	grow	into	years,	Ava	finds	herself	feeling	sorry
for	herself	more	and	more	frequently.	She	lets	herself	notice	and	experience	the
pain	 and	 recognizes	 it	 as	 a	 signal	 that	 something	 inside	 her	 is	 not	 being
expressed,	that	something	needs	to	change.	She	wants	more	time	away	from	the
house	 and	 away	 from	 Reese,	 whom	 she	 dearly	 loves,	 but	 whom	 she	 is	 also
starting	to	resent.
She	resents	Reese’s	frequent	requests	for	help.	She	also	feels	sorrow	about	the

predicament	she	is	in.	And	she	feels	genuine	empathy	for	Reese’s	wishes	to	have
her	around	to	talk	to	and	for	the	pain	he	must	feel	about	having	lost	his	ability	to
walk.	Thinking	about	expressing	any	of	 these	things	scares	her.	She’s	afraid	of
stirring	up	even	more	pain.	“Haven’t	we	suffered	enough?”	she	rationalizes.	But
as	she	stays	with	her	mixture	of	feelings,	she	knows	that	she	must	express	them



to	Reese.	She	 tells	 him	 she	wants	his	undivided	 attention,	 so	 they	 turn	off	 the
television	 and	 she	 begins:	 “Reese,	 I’m	 feeling	 a	 pain	 in	 my	 heart	 for	 the
predicament	we’re	 in	here.	 I	 feel	 resentment	 toward	you	 for	asking	me	 to	stay
home	this	morning.	And	yet	always	in	the	background	is	how	much	I	love	you.	I
appreciate	how	you	listen	to	me,	and	how	you	look	at	me	when	we’re	together.	I
really	do	love	your	company.	And	I	want	to	get	out	of	the	house	more.	I	want	to
walk	 in	 nature	 the	way	we	 used	 to.	 I’m	 so	 sad	 for	 you	 that	 you	 can’t	 do	 that
anymore.”

There	is	great	value	in	including	both	your	feelings	in	one
statement.	Sharing	both	can	give	your	statement	added	depth
and	genuineness.

This	conversation	was	a	good	beginning	for	the	pair.	After	saying	those	things
and	 seeing	 that	 they	 actually	 felt	 closer	 as	 a	 result,	 she	 realized	 she	 would
probably	need	to	do	this	sort	of	sharing	often.	Once	was	not	going	to	be	enough.
The	situation	was	not	going	to	change	very	much	on	the	outside,	so	she	needed
to	take	care	of	herself	on	the	inside	to	keep	herself	from	getting	stuck.	She	would
keep	 this	 conversation	 alive	 so	 that	 they	 could	 become	 better	 and	 better	 at
talking	 about	 feelings	 they	 found	 difficult	 to	 express	 and	 at	 clearing	 the	 air
regularly.	The	truth	is,	it	does	get	easier.

When	to	Use	This	Truth	Skill

This	truth	skill	can	be	useful	when	your	buttons	get	pushed	and	you	want	to
let	the	other	person	know	about	it	in	a	nonblaming	way.	Here’s	how	that	might
look:	 start	 by	 recalling	 what	 the	 other	 person	 did,	 your	 reaction,	 and	 your
feelings	 or	 thoughts	 about	 that	 reaction.	 Disclosing	 all	 parts	 of	 your	 response
will	allow	you	to	improve	your	skill	at	sharing	mixed	emotions.	As	an	example,
you	might	feel	anger	or	jealousy	or	fear	but	also	wish	you	had	not	reacted	that
way.	 In	 this	 case,	 share	 what	 you	 are	 feeling	 and	 then	 add,	 “and	 I’m	 also
thinking	that	I	wish	I	hadn’t	reacted	that	way.”
Another	 situation	 in	 which	 you	 can	 practice	 this	 skill	 is	 when	 you	 receive

surprising	 feedback.	 Perhaps	 you	 feel	 upset	 because	 someone	 just	 gave	 you
some	 feedback	 that’s	 different	 from	 how	 you	 perceive	 yourself.	 At	 the	 same



time,	you	do	want	to	know	how	other	people	see	you.	You	don’t	want	people	to
walk	on	eggshells	around	you.	So	how	do	you	relate	all	these	things	truthfully?
You	could	say,	“I	resent	you	for	saying	I	sounded	inauthentic.	I	think	I’m	feeling
misunderstood.	And	I	also	have	self-talk	that	says	I’m	not	wanting	to	cut	myself
off	 from	getting	 that	 type	of	 feedback	 just	because	 it	makes	me	uncomfortable
—	so	I	do	appreciate	you	for	telling	me	I	sounded	inauthentic.”
Any	time	your	response	to	a	situation	or	to	someone	else’s	expression	consists

of	several	parts,	you	have	an	opportunity	to	practice	expressing	mixed	emotions.
Maybe	you	have	two	or	more	different	feelings,	as	in	“I	feel	scared,	and	I	want
to	 do	 it	 anyway.”	 Or	 you	 have	 an	 immediate	 reaction	 tempered	 by	 a	 more
considered	afterthought,	as	in	“Yes,	I’ll	marry	you!	Well,	that’s	what	I	feel,	but
maybe	we’d	better	 talk	about	a	few	things	first.”	Or	maybe	you	have	a	feeling
followed	by	a	thought	or	judgment	about	that	feeling	as	in	“I’m	jealous!	I	don’t
want	 you	 to	 go	 on	 that	 business	 trip	without	me,	 and	 I’m	 judging	myself	 for
feeling	this	way.	I	wish	I	felt	more	trusting	and	less	clingy.”

Do	not	assume	that	one	feeling	cancels	out	the	other(s).	Both
(or	all)	can	be	true.

As	with	 the	other	 skills,	 after	 some	conscious	practice,	 you’ll	 probably	 find
yourself	 sharing	mixed	 feelings	more	 spontaneously	 and	 naturally.	 You	won’t
have	to	think	about	it	anymore,	because	the	appropriate	responses	will	be	there
when	you	need	them.

Sharing	Mixed	Emotions	in	a	Nutshell

•	As	with	the	other	truth	skills,	we’ve	seen	how	important	it	is	to	notice	what
is	without	praise	or	blame,	to	be	sincere,	to	stay	with	feelings	without	cutting
them	off,	to	express	what	you	feel	and	allow	it	to	change,	and	to	notice	your
aim.

•	Whenever	you	care	for	a	person	but	don’t	like	something	he’s	done,	you
have	an	opportunity	to	practice	sharing	mixed	emotions.	Other	occasions	are
when	you	wish	to	express	anger	but	fear	damaging	the	friendship;	when	you
appreciate	the	other’s	intent,	even	though	they	fell	short	on	the	execution	of
that	intent;	when	you	need	to	assert	your	boundaries	or	wants,	while	at	the



same	time	empathizing	with	the	other;	when	you	have	an	immediate	reaction
followed	by	a	more	considered	response;	when	you	want	to	do	something
but	are	also	scared;	or	when	you	have	one	feeling,	immediately	followed	by
a	thought	or	judgment	about	that	feeling.

After	communicating	something	that	you	imagine	is	difficult
to	receive,	stay	around	long	enough	to	hear	and	deal	with	the
other	person’s	response.

•	Start	out	by	sharing	whichever	feeling	or	thought	is	foreground,	and	then
allow	the	other	feeling	or	feelings	to	surface	and	be	expressed.	Do	not
assume	that	one	feeling	cancels	out	the	other(s).	Both	(or	all)	can	be	true.

•	If	you	appreciate	something	a	person	did	and	also	resent	something	else,	start
by	expressing	whichever	is	in	your	foreground.	Notice	whether	you	feel
relaxed	or	tense.	Tension	means	the	resentment	is	foreground	for	you,	so
express	that	first.	Then	keep	expressing	the	resentment(s)	until	your	bodily
feelings	change.	When	you	feel	more	open	and	relaxed,	and	the	resentment
seems	to	have	faded,	share	your	appreciations.

•	After	communicating	something	that	you	imagine	is	difficult	to	receive,	stay
around	long	enough	to	hear	and	deal	with	the	other	person’s	response.



CHAPTER	11
EMBRACING	THE	SILENCE

OF	NOT	KNOWING
ENTERING	THE
FERTILE	VOID

Authentic	communication	depends	as	much	on	silence	as	 it	does	on	words	—
the	 silences	 between	 your	 words	 and	 the	 silence	 you	 leave	 after	 you	 have
spoken,	awaiting	the	other’s	response.	Silence	is	needed	to	allow	your	words	to
sink	 in.	 You	 also	 hear	 yourself	 better	 when	 there	 are	 silences.	 Listening	 to
yourself	is	an	essential	ingredient	for	being	present.	Silence	between	words	also
provides	room	for	new	ideas	and	feelings	to	gestate	and	take	form	—	yours	and
the	other	 person’s.	Becoming	 comfortable	with	 silence	 is	what	 truth	 skill	 #10,
embracing	silence,	is	about.	When	you	can	embrace	silence,	you	do	not	need	to
know	everything	in	advance	or	have	all	the	blanks	filled	in.	You	understand	that
there	are	many	things	that	cannot	be	known	all	at	once	or	once	and	for	all.	These
things	 emerge	 gradually	 as	 we	 learn	 to	 be	 more	 patient	 and	 to	 openly	 wait,
without	forcing	the	issue.
Have	you	 ever	 noticed	how	 some	people	 (maybe	 even	you!)	 ask	 a	 question

and	 then,	 before	 the	 other	 person	 has	 had	 a	 chance	 to	 respond,	 answer	 it
themselves?	When	I	notice	myself	doing	this,	I	know	it’s	an	indication	that	I’m
avoiding	something	—	probably	the	void.	In	ancient	mythology,	the	void	or	the
silence	was	 seen	 as	 the	 emptiness	 out	 of	 which	 all	 things	 are	 created.	 In	 all
cultures,	the	void	is	a	powerful	symbol.	It	is	the	ground	of	creation,	the	sea	out
of	which	new	life	emerges.	 It	 is	also	associated	with	death,	 the	unknown.	And
for	some	unknown	reason,	people	tend	to	fear	the	unknown.
Just	the	other	day	when	I	was	at	a	friend’s	house,	I	noticed	she	had	a	bulletin

board	 in	 her	 group	 room	with	 flyers	 and	 announcements	 of	 coming	 events.	 I
started	to	ask	if	I	could	post	one	of	my	workshop	flyers	on	her	board,	but	as	soon



as	I	asked	the	question,	I	felt	anxiety	about	how	she	might	react.	I	knew	from	a
previous	 conversation	 that	 she	 had	 other	 things	 on	 her	 mind,	 so	 I	 began	 to
imagine	 that	my	question	was	an	 imposition.	The	 truth	was	I	had	no	 idea	how
she	would	respond.	And	there	was	really	no	reason	to	be	anxious.	But	I	was.	So
instead	 of	 allowing	 her	 to	 answer	 my	 question,	 I	 answered	 it	 myself.	 I	 said
something	like,	“Oh	we	don’t	have	to	deal	with	this	now,”	thus	staying	in	control
and	 avoiding	 the	 truth	 of	 the	 present	 moment,	 the	 truth	 of	 staying	 for	 a	 few
moments	in	the	silence	of	not-knowing.	This	mundane	example	shows	how	the
ego-mind	 works.	 If	 it	 gets	 the	 tiniest	 bit	 uncomfortable,	 it	 initiates	 a	 control
pattern	 —	 in	 this	 case	 the	 pattern	 of	 filling	 the	 silence	 to	 avoid	 feeling	 the
anxiety	of	waiting	for	an	unknown	reply.

In	all	cultures,	the	void	is	a	powerful	symbol.	It	is	the	ground
of	creation,	the	sea	out	of	which	new	life	emerges.

I	remember	my	dad	used	to	do	this	too.	Right	after	he	died,	my	brothers	and	I
were	watching	some	of	 the	videotapes	of	 television	 shows	he’d	been	on	—	as
part	of	our	grieving	process,	as	a	way	to	remember	him.	We	had	a	few	tapes	of
shows	in	which	he	had	interviewed	famous	authors	about	their	writings.	In	one
particular	 segment,	 he	 was	 interviewing	 Jerome	 Frank	 about	 his	 book	 on	 the
nuclear	age.	He	asked,	“Dr.	Frank,	what	do	you	think	about	the	Star	Wars	project
that	our	government	 is	putting	so	much	money	into?”	Then,	apparently	feeling
anxious	or	uneasy,	or	wanting	the	interview	to	go	his	way,	he	immediately	went
on	without	a	pause,	“Don’t	you	think	it’s	obvious	that	this	is	a	manipulation	by
the	military-industrial	powers	to	keep	their	budgets	well	funded?”	He	said	a	few
more	things	before	he	finally	shut	up	and	let	the	expert	speak.	“Dad’s	answering
his	own	question,”	quipped	my	brother	Al.	We	all	got	a	good	laugh	out	of	that.	It
felt	so	familiar	to	us	all.

Sometimes	Nothing	Is	Better	Than	Something

When	 I	was	 thirteen	 years	 old	 and	 just	 getting	 interested	 in	 boys,	 I	 used	 to
engage	 regularly	 in	 another	practice	 that	 is	 actually	 the	opposite	 of	 embracing
silence.	 If	 I	 knew	 that	 a	 boy	was	 planning	 to	 call	me	 on	 a	 particular	 night,	 I
would	jot	down	a	page	of	notes	about	subjects	to	talk	about	if	the	conversation



started	to	lag	and	cute	quips	to	come	back	with	if	he	said	what	I	thought	he	was
going	 to	 say.	 I	 had	my	part	 all	 scripted!	 I	 thought	 doing	 this	made	me	 appear
confident	and	cool,	and	I	believed	that	it	would	also	put	the	boy	at	ease	—	you
know,	no	long	awkward	silences.	Maybe	it	did	make	me	look	cool,	but	I	doubt
that	 it	 put	 the	 boy	 at	 ease.	 I	 imagine	 it	 made	 for	 a	 pretty	 stiff,	 unreal
conversation.	And	I	now	know	that	looking	cool	is	not	the	purpose	of	life!
When	 I	 reflect	 on	 my	 teenage	 need	 to	 be	 ready	 with	 a	 quick	 comeback,	 I

recognize	 two	 rather	 strongly	held	cultural	beliefs:	 the	belief	 that	 something	 is
better	 than	 nothing	 and	 the	 idea	 that	 fast	 is	 better	 than	 slow.	Are	we	 ready	 to
challenge	 these	 out-dated	 notions?	 Are	 we	 ready	 to	 enter	 the	 realm	 of
uncertainty	together	so	that	we	can	experience	true	in-the-moment	contact?

The	belief	that	knowing	is	better	than	not	knowing	is	one	of
the	fundamental	dysfunctional	beliefs	of	our	culture.

The	belief	that	knowing	is	better	than	not	knowing	is	one	of	the	fundamental
dysfunctional	 beliefs	 of	 our	 culture.	 Somewhere	 we	 got	 the	 idea	 that	 our
emotional	 security	 depends	 on	 being	 able	 to	 control	 how	 we	 come	 across	 to
others.	Not	 knowing	makes	 us	 feel	 not	 in	 control.	 Thinking	we	 know,	 even	 if
what	 we	 “know”	 is	 not	 true,	 makes	 us	 feel	 on	 top	 of	 things.	 When	 we’re
operating	from	this	perspective,	we	think	that	if	we	act	knowledgeable	or	say	the
right	 thing,	 people	will	 think	 better	 of	 us.	What	we	 forget	 is	 that	 this	 sort	 of
control	is	an	illusion.

Self-Assessment	Quiz

Here’s	a	quiz	to	help	you	assess	your	ability	to	tolerate	silence,	empty	space,
or	not	knowing.	For	each	question,	rate	yourself	from	1	to	5	(with	1	being	not
usually	true	of	you	and	5	being	mostly	true):

1.	I	often	finish	people’s	sentences	for	them	(or	at	least	I	feel	like	doing	it).
2.	I	find	it	frustrating	when	someone	takes	a	long	time	to	make	his	point.
3.	If	someone	asks	me	a	question,	I	usually	answer	it	right	away,	without	much
reflection.

4.	If	I	ask	someone	else	a	question,	I	like	her	to	answer	it	right	away	and	not



leave	me	hanging.
5.	I	sometimes	ask	a	question	and	then	answer	it	myself	without	giving	the
other	a	chance	to	reply.

6.	I	find	it	hard	to	tolerate	ambiguity,	uncertainty,	or	being	in	limbo.
7.	When	I’m	around	the	house	alone,	I	often	keep	radio,	television,	or	music
playing	in	the	background.

8.	I	like	to	keep	busy	(or,	even	if	I	don’t	think	I	like	it,	I	usually	am	busy).

If	you	scored	several	3’s,	4’s,	or	5’s,	embracing	silence	is	probably	a	challenge
for	you.	In	this	doing-oriented	culture,	we	do	not	learn	to	value	silence.	In	school
we	were	taught	that	knowing	is	better	than	not	knowing.	And	on	the	job,	looking
busy	is	generally	preferred	to	sitting	at	your	desk	staring	out	the	window.
The	most	 important	 thing	about	embracing	silence	 in	a	human	 interaction	 is

that	 it	 allows	 for	 feelings	 to	 be	 fully	 experienced,	 your	 inner	 feelings	 and	 the
feelings	being	exchanged.	This	helps	you	develop	your	ability	to	notice	what	is
and	prepares	you	to	communicate	with	more	of	your	whole	being,	so	you’re	not
just	coming	from	your	head	or	your	automatic	control	pattern.	I	recommend	that
you	pause	before	speaking	—	to	check	in	with	yourself,	to	get	grounded	in	your
bodily	sensations,	and	to	connect	with	the	other	person.	This	takes	a	few	seconds
of	silence.	During	this	silence,	energy	is	building	to	support	the	contact	between
you	and	the	other.

I	recommend	that	you	pause	before	speaking	—	to	check	in
with	yourself,	to	get	grounded	in	your	bodily	sensations,	and
to	connect	with	the	other	personn.

Embracing	Silence	in	Groups

Notice	your	behavior	the	next	time	you	are	sharing	in	a	group	setting:	Do	you
begin	talking	right	away,	as	soon	as	it’s	your	turn?	Or	do	you	take	a	few	seconds
to	connect?	Do	you	have	something	planned	to	say	before	you	begin	to	address
the	group?	Or	do	you	sit	in	the	silence	and	see	what	emerges?
To	 encourage	 the	 people	 in	 my	 groups	 to	 allow	 time	 to	 connect	 with

themselves	and	others	before	speaking,	I	often	use	the	“talking	egg”	—	a	toy	egg
that	 gets	 passed	 to	whomever	 is	 speaking	 next,	 signifying	 that	 it’s	 her	 turn	 to



speak	and	that	no	one	can	interrupt,	even	if	she’s	sitting	in	silence.	In	the	Native
American	 Indian	 tradition,	 when	 people	 sit	 in	 a	 circle,	 they	 use	 the	 “talking
stick”	 to	 signify	 whose	 turn	 it	 is	 to	 speak.	 I	 find	 that	 using	 the	 talking	 egg
supports	people	in	embracing	silence.	They	can	hold	the	egg	for	a	while	before
opening	their	mouth.	This	gives	them	a	chance	to	check	in	and	feel	how	they	feel
before	they	start	talking.	Likewise,	at	the	end	of	their	sharing,	they	can	hold	the
egg	as	 long	as	 they	wish,	 so	 they	can	 really	make	contact	with	 the	others	 and
take	 in	 their	 response	 instead	 of	 rushing	 offstage	 as	 soon	 as	 they’ve	 finished
speaking.
In	many	group	meetings	that	I	attend,	everyone	seems	to	be	competing	for	air

time.	At	the	briefest	pause	in	conversation,	someone	will	jump	in	to	get	her	piece
in	—	even	 if	 the	previous	 speaker	was	 simply	pausing	 for	 breath.	 In	 our	 fast-
paced	culture,	we’ve	learned	that	we’d	better	not	breathe	too	much	or	we’ll	lose
our	turn!	This	is	why	I	use	the	talking	egg	in	my	groups	—	as	an	antidote	to	this
tendency	to	rush	in	to	fill	every	void.
The	Quakers	use	a	practice	in	their	meetings	that	encourages	listening	to	the

silence	of	one’s	own	inner	truth	before	speaking.	It	is	the	simple	practice	of	only
speaking	 when	 the	 spirit	 moves	 you.	 Typically,	 Quaker	 meetings	 are
characterized	by	long	silences	between	the	members’	thoughtful	sharings.	I	have
always	felt	nourished	and	inspired	by	this	practice.	At	times,	in	my	groups,	I	will
describe	 how	 a	 Quaker	 meeting	 is	 run	 and	 suggest	 that	 we	 follow	 those
guidelines.	Allowing	for	silences	between	sharings	seems	to	help	people	become
present	before	they	speak.	As	a	result,	the	things	that	are	said	seem	more	real.

Allowing	for	silences	between	sharings	seems	to	help	people
become	present	before	they	speak.	As	a	result,	the	things	that
are	said	seem	more	real.

Take	Your	Applause

Lee	 Glickstein,	 founder	 of	 Speaking	 Circles,	 a	 training	 program	 for
professional	speakers,	places	a	lot	of	emphasis	on	the	importance	of	silence.	In
his	workshops,	 he	 encourages	 speakers	 to	 stand	on	 the	 stage	 and	 look	around,
making	 eye	 contact	with	 a	 few	 audience	members,	 one	 at	 a	 time,	 before	 they
start	their	speeches.	Then,	at	the	end,	he	tells	them,	“Stand	still.	Don’t	hurry	to



get	off	the	stage.	Take	your	applause.”	The	speakers	who	have	worked	with	Lee,
and	 I	 am	 one	 of	 them,	 report	 that	 after	 adopting	 his	methods,	 they	 feel	much
more	 at	 home	 onstage	 and	much	more	 connected	 to	 their	 audiences,	 and	 they
experience	much	 less	 stage	 fright.	 I	 think	 I	 feel	 less	 fear	 because	 this	 practice
allows	me	 to	 feel	connected	 to	myself	and	others,	 that	 is,	more	present,	 so	 the
world	feels	like	a	friendlier	place.

After	you	say	something,	pause	and	take	in	the	fact	that	the
other	is	now	receiving	what	you	just	said.

I	 love	Lee’s	phrase	“take	your	applause,”	because	 I	 find	 it	applies	 to	almost
any	 conversation	between	people.	After	 you	 say	 something,	 pause	 and	 take	 in
the	fact	that	the	other	is	now	receiving	what	you	just	said.	Take	in	that	sense	of
being	received.	If	you’re	worried	about	not	being	heard,	as	many	people	are,	this
act	could	be	very	healing	for	you.

Embracing	Silence	Using	Meditation

Tanya	 was	 a	 nonstop	 talker.	 Her	 husband,	 Greg,	 was	 more	 the	 silent	 type.
Tanya	was	often	frustrated	by	his	lack	of	attentiveness	and	reluctance	to	engage.
As	the	years	went	by,	Tanya	seemed	to	get	more	demanding,	and	Greg	seemed	to
get	more	withdrawn	as	their	differences	became	more	and	more	polarized.	She
saw	this	polarization	as	a	classic	case	of	one	partner	acting	out	the	shadow	of	the
other,	but	 she	was	 stymied	about	how	 to	change	herself.	Then	one	night,	 after
reading	 a	 book	 about	meditation,	 Tanya	 decided	 to	 try	 it.	Meditation	 involves
sitting	still	and	silent	with	a	straight	spine	and	eyes	closed.	It	occurred	to	her	that
this	practice	might	help	her	marriage	 and	 that	 she	had	 something	 important	 to
learn	from	embracing	silence	—	even	though	the	act	of	sitting	quietly	was	a	big
stretch	for	her.	Tanya	began	to	sit	in	meditation	for	thirty	minutes	each	day,	just
after	getting	out	of	bed	in	the	morning.	Greg	knew	she	was	doing	it,	and	since	it
didn’t	seem	to	affect	his	life	much,	he	just	let	her	do	her	thing.
After	 practicing	 meditation	 for	 about	 three	 months,	 Tanya	 began	 to	 feel

quieter	and	more	spacious	inside.	It	was	as	if	there	were	more	room	inside	her	to
notice	 and	 feel	 her	 feelings,	 to	 be	 aware	 of	 her	 surroundings,	 and	 to	 be	more
available	to	whatever	was	going	on.	At	first	she	thought,	“This	is	working!	And



it	 feels	 pretty	 good.”	 But	 after	 a	 few	 months	 more,	 something	 unexpected
happened.	 Every	 time	 she	 sat	 in	 silence,	 she	would	 notice	 unpleasant,	 painful
sensations	and	emotions	—	a	combination	of	 fear,	anger,	and	raw	gut	pain.	“It
wasn’t	 supposed	 to	 be	 like	 this,”	 she	 complained	 to	 herself.	 “Meditation	 is
supposed	to	make	you	more	peaceful.”
As	she	continued	to	meditate,	the	pain	became	more	persistent	and	intense.	At

that	point	she	came	to	me	for	counseling,	since	I	was	familiar	with	meditation.	I
encouraged	her	to	stay	with	the	painful	feelings	as	the	noticer,	to	feel	them	fully
to	 discover	 the	message	 in	 the	 pain.	As	 she	 continued	meditating	 and	 staying
with	 her	 feelings,	 she	 had	 a	 vivid	memory	 of	 being	 physically	 abused	 by	 her
parents	 when	 she	 was	 four	 years	 old.	 When	 she	 bothered	 them	 with	 her
demands,	 they	 would	 tie	 her	 to	 a	 chair	 in	 her	 room	 with	 duct	 tape.	 These
memories	horrified	her,	as	she	wondered	if	staying	with	the	pain	was	really	the
right	thing	to	do.	Working	with	me,	Tanya	learned	to	support	her	wounded	inner
child	 from	 the	 place	 of	 loving	 spaciousness	 that	 she	 had	 discovered	 within
herself.	 She	 also	 realized	 that	 she	 needed	 to	 get	 completion	with	 her	 parents,
both	of	whom	were	still	alive	but	who	were	now	quite	aged.	She	made	a	date	to
meet	with	them,	hoping	to	use	some	of	the	truth	skills	she	had	been	learning	with
me.	 Her	 intent	 was	 to	 let	 them	 see	 the	 feelings	 she	 had	 gotten	 in	 touch	 with
during	meditation	so	she	could	heal	herself	and	her	relationship	with	them.	She
had	 some	 fear	 about	 expressing	her	 anger	 at	what	 they	had	done,	 because	 she
imagined	 it	 would	 upset	 them.	 And	 she	 was	 committed	 to	 listening	 to	 their
response,	to	actively	listen	or	hold	differences	if	needed.	But,	in	essence,	she	was
more	committed	to	truth	than	to	safety,	so	she	called	her	parents	and	arranged	for
a	meeting.	On	the	phone,	she	told	them	that	she	had	begun	meditating,	and	that
sitting	in	silence	had	allowed	her	to	listen	more	deeply	to	some	things	she	had
repressed	about	her	childhood.	She	did	not	give	them	the	details	over	the	phone.
I	generally	recommend	that	you	save	the	details	for	the	face-to-face	meeting.

It	was	as	if	there	were	more	room	inside	her	to	notice	and	feel
her	feelings,	to	be	aware	of	her	surroundings,	and	to	be	more
available	to	whatever	was	going	on.

When	the	meeting	occurred,	she	started	out	by	describing	the	resentments	and
appreciations	process,	as	discussed	in	chapter	3.	She	told	them	her	intent	was	to
get	over	the	anger	and	pain	she	felt	about	some	things	they	had	done	to	her	when



she	was	a	child.	Her	 intent	was	not	 to	hurt	or	punish	 them.	She	had	heard	 that
this	sort	of	frank	conversation	could	lead	to	forgiveness,	and	she	felt	she	had	to
try	it.	She	said	that	she	wanted	them	to	simply	listen	until	she	had	finished,	and
then	she	would	like	to	listen	to	them.	She	began	by	sitting	quietly,	just	looking	at
them.	Then	she	expressed	her	resentments	one	by	one	to	each	of	them:	“Dad,	I
resent	you	for	sitting	me	in	that	chair	and	tying	me	in	with	duct	tape	when	I	was
four	years	old.”	“Mom,	 I	 resent	you	 for	helping	Dad	 tie	me	up	with	duct	 tape
when	I	was	four	years	old.”	“Dad,	I	resent	you	for	telling	me	to	stop	crying	when
you	were	 tying	me	up	with	duct	 tape!”	She	continued	with	her	 resentments	as
they	came	to	her,	often	repeating	them	just	so	she	could	feel	her	feelings	more
clearly.
After	 about	 twenty-five	 minutes	 of	 sharing	 resentments,	 she	 remembered

some	things	she	was	grateful	for.	So	she	expressed	these	too:	“Dad,	I	appreciate
you	for	saying	you	were	sorry	after	you	spanked	me	that	time	when	I	was	five.	I
appreciate	 you	 for	 teaching	me	 to	 read.	 I	 appreciate	 you	 for	 telling	me	 I	was
smart.”	 She	 spent	 about	 ten	 minutes	 expressing	 her	 appreciations	 to	 both	 her
mom	and	dad.	By	the	time	it	was	their	turn	to	speak,	they	were	all	crying.	Both
her	parents	expressed	sincere	sorrow	at	the	pain	they	had	inflicted	on	her.	They
sheepishly	asked	 for	her	 forgiveness	and	were	elated	when	Tanya	said	she	 felt
she	could	now	let	go	of	the	anger	and	the	pain.	Before	this	conversation,	Tanya
had	only	spoken	to	her	parents	at	Christmas	and	on	birthdays	for	the	past	twelve
years.	She	knew	she	had	been	feeling	alienated	 from	them,	but	she	hadn’t	had
the	free	attention	to	look	honestly	at	what	she	was	withholding.	She	had	chosen
instead	to	go	into	denial	about	her	feelings,	using	nonstop	talking	as	one	of	her
avoidance	patterns.
When	she	returned,	she	told	me	she	felt	stronger	and	clearer	than	she	had	ever

felt.	“And	now	I	have	parents	—	parents	that	I	really	like	and	love	—	in	spite	of
the	awful	things	they	did.	I	survived.	I’m	okay.	I	think	I’m	more	okay	for	having
gone	 through	 that	 difficult	 childhood	 and	 coming	 out	 the	 other	 end.	 I	 have
learned	some	lessons	about	pain	and	healing	that	I	may	need	to	use	again	in	the
future.”

Every	human	interaction	entails	a	large	measure	of
uncertainty.	Each	time	you	express	yourself,	you	take	a	step
into	the	unknown,	into	“empty	space.”



Tanya	had	been	in	therapy	before,	but	not	until	she	became	a	meditator	could
she	be	still	enough	to	access	the	really	deep	memories	that	she	had	been	running
from.	After	she	completed	with	her	parents,	her	compulsion	to	talk	all	the	time
seemed	to	vanish.	She	now	realized	that	Greg	actually	does	say	quite	a	bit.	He
just	 speaks	 quietly	 and	 slowly.	 She	 had	 never	 noticed	 this	 about	 him	 before,
because	she	wasn’t	able	 to	 listen.	She	was	always	either	 talking	out	 loud	or	 to
herself.	As	you	might	 imagine,	her	marriage	also	 improved	after	 the	visit	with
her	parents.	Now	it	was	Greg’s	turn	to	get	an	earful!	But	that’s	another	story.	Let
me	just	say	that	they	survived	just	fine.

Using	Uncertainty	to	Connect

Every	human	interaction	entails	a	large	measure	of	uncertainty.	Each	time	you
express	yourself,	you	 take	a	step	 into	 the	unknown,	 into	“empty	space.”	When
Tanya	started	telling	her	dad	what	she	resented,	she	had	no	idea	how	he	would
respond.	She	was	taking	a	risk	on	behalf	of	 the	relationship.	I	 imagine	her	dad
sensed	the	courage	that	took,	even	if	he	didn’t	like	what	he	was	hearing.
Any	 time	 you	 express	 yourself	 to	 someone,	 you	 may	 be	 trying	 to	 remain

unattached	to	the	outcome,	but	you	probably	do	care	what	the	other’s	response
will	be.	But	you	can’t	know	what	it	will	be,	you’ll	be	in	limbo,	until	he	shares	it
with	 you.	 So	while	 you’re	waiting	 for	 a	 response,	 see	 if	 you	 can	 embrace	 the
silence.	 Feel	 your	 own	 feelings	 as	 you	 listen	 and	 wait.	 Allow	 the	 sense	 of
connection	 to	 build.	 Don’t	 speak	 and	 then	 immediately	 disconnect	 as	 soon	 as
you	 have	 spoken.	 Stay	with	 the	 energy	 of	 connection	 for	 a	while.	 If	 you	 find
yourself	 using	 a	 control	 pattern	 to	 avoid	 these	 moments	 of	 uncertainty	 with
others,	 you	 could	 “go	 out	 and	 come	 in	 again,”	 as	 discussed	 in	 chapter	 8.	 It’s
never	too	late	to	revise	or	redo	an	interaction	as	long	as	the	people	involved	are
still	alive.

Allow	the	sense	of	connection	to	build.	Don’t	speak	and	then
immediately	disconnect	as	soon	as	you	have	spoken.	Stay	with
the	energy	of	connection	for	a	while.

But	what	if	you	are	attached	to	the	outcome?	What	if	you	not	only	care	about
the	other’s	response,	but	you	can’t	stand	to	be	told	no	or	to	be	disagreed	with?	If



you	do	“care	too	much,”	if	you	are	impatient	or	attached	to	a	certain	outcome,	it
will	be	difficult	for	you	to	embrace	silence.	You	may	feel	compelled	to	fill	in	the
empty	space	between	your	expression	and	her	response	with	more	words	of	your
own.	When	my	dad	was	interviewing	Jerome	Frank,	he	probably	wanted	to	make
sure	 he	 got	 an	 answer	 he	 could	 work	 with	 —	 so	 he	 answered	 his	 question
himself.	If	you	imagine	that	someone	may	not	give	you	the	response	you	want,
you	may	go	into	whatever	control	pattern	you	use	for	such	situations,	some	kind
of	 sales	 pitch,	 perhaps.	 But	 doing	 so	 creates	 static	 rather	 than	 connection
between	you.	As	a	result,	you	may	never	discover	what	the	other	person	really
thinks	or	 feels.	 If	you’re	not	able	 to	be	still	and	receptive,	 the	other	will	sense
that	you’re	not	open,	so	he	won’t	offer	his	deepest	and	truest	expression.	He	may
just	tell	you	what	he	thinks	you	want	to	hear.

Do	You	Ask	or	Do	You	Tell?

If	you	want	to	be	the	type	of	person	with	whom	people	can	be	true	and	honest,
if	you	don’t	just	want	to	be	told	what	others	think	you	want	to	hear,	take	a	look
at	how	spacious	you	are	as	opposed	to	how	attached	you	are	to	getting	things	to
go	 your	 way.	 Think	 about	 your	 recent	 interactions	 with	 people.	 Notice	 what
proportion	of	the	time	you	spent	telling	people	what	to	do,	how	to	do	it,	or	what
you	 think,	 feel,	 or	 want	 and	 what	 proportion	 you	 spent	 asking	 about	 their
thoughts,	feelings,	 ideas,	or	wants	and	then	really	listening	with	an	open	mind.
Do	you	tell	or	do	you	ask?	Do	you	take	space	or	do	you	make	space?

If	you	want	to	be	the	type	of	person	with	whom	people	can	be
true	and	honest,	if	you	don’t	just	you	want	to	be	told	what
others	think	you	want	to	hear,	take	a	look	at	how	spacious	you
are	as	opposed	to	how	attached	you	are	to	getting	things	to	go
your	way.

If	 you	 spend	 most	 of	 your	 interactive	 energy	 on	 the	 telling	 side	 of	 the
equation,	 this	 usually	 signals	 a	 high	 need	 to	 feel	 in	 control.	 If	 you	 are	 in	 a
management	role	(or	a	parenting	role)	in	which	you	need	to	direct	others’	efforts,
a	 certain	 amount	 of	 control	 may	 be	 necessary.	 But	 there	 is	 a	 way	 to	 give
assignments	 that	 is	clear	about	your	expectations	and	 that	still	 leaves	room	for



the	other’s	response	and	input.	You	can	let	the	other	know	that	you	see	it	as	part
of	your	 job	 to	 let	 them	know	your	expectations,	clearly	and	directly.	Then	you
can	ask	 them	for	 feedback	on	your	management	 style.	Find	out	 if	 it	works	 for
them.	You	can	also	use	some	of	the	tools	from	chapter	9,	“Holding	Differences,”
like	presenting	your	request	or	viewpoint	and	then	hearing	how	they	see	it,	using
active	listening.

In	today’s	Information	Age...	we	need	to	know	that	our
information	is	free	from	distortions	caused	by	peoples’	control
patterns	and	fears	about	telling	it	like	it	is.

Are	You	Open	or	Closed?

If	 someone	 disagrees	 with	 your	 position	 on	 an	 important	 matter,	 do	 you
quickly	reassert	your	position,	as	in,	“Perhaps	you	didn’t	hear	what	I	said,”	or	do
you	inquire	about	their	reasons	for	their	position,	as	in,	“Can	you	tell	me	more
about	why	you	think	that?”	This	latter	response	shows	people	that	you	are	open.
By	 being	 open	 I	 mean	 showing	 that	 you	 sincerely	 seek	 to	 learn	 something

from	 another	 person.	 When	 you	 have	 an	 inquiring	 attitude,	 with	 or	 without
actually	asking	a	question,	people	can	see	that	you	are	open	to	them.	They	feel
significant.	 They	 feel	 safe,	 so	 they	 are	 more	 likely	 to	 tell	 it	 like	 it	 is.	 Your
communication	is	free	of	static,	so	the	information	you	get	is	more	likely	to	be
valid.	 And	 in	 today’s	 Information	 Age,	 when	 we	 base	 our	 decisions	 almost
solely	on	information	coming	from	other	people,	we	need	to	know	that	it	is	free
from	the	distortions	caused	by	people’s	control	patterns	and	fears	about	telling	it
like	it	is.

Spacious	Listening

Embracing	silence	and	being	open	to	 listening	to	others	are	prerequisites	for
real,	vital	human	connection.	But	another	type	of	listening	is	just	as	important	as
listening	to	others,	and	that	is	listening	to	ourselves,	sensing	the	silences	between
our	words	or	thoughts.	Often	the	deepest	truths	arise	from	the	spaces	in	between
words,	that	fertile	void	where	thoughts	are	absent.



As	 a	 professional	 speaker,	 I	 am	 asked	 a	 lot	 of	 questions.	 Sometimes	 I
acknowledge	 the	 question	 and	 begin	 to	 answer.	 Then	 I	 remember	 to	 pause.
Sometimes,	during	 the	pause,	a	new	feeling	arises,	 something	 that	may	appear
unrelated	to	what	I	have	just	started	to	say.	If	this	occurs,	I	share	this	response	as
well,	mentioning	 that	 I	 am	 allowing	my	 thinking	 process	 to	 be	 transparent	 so
they	 can	 see	 how	 I	 give	 birth	 to	 an	 idea.	 To	 the	 control-oriented	 mind,	 my
response	 could	 sound	 unpolished	 or	 half-baked.	 Then	 I	 pause	 again,	 and	 a
clearer	message	comes	out,	one	 that	 ties	 the	 two	seemingly	unrelated	 thoughts
together.	 My	 response	 took	 a	 bit	 of	 time	 and	 space	 to	 form	 into	 something
coherent.

Often	the	deepest	truths	arise	from	the	spaces	in	between
words,	that	fertile	void	where	thoughts	are	absent.

Human	communication	is	an	alive,	ever-changing	creation	—	it	is	created,	re-
created,	 and	 cocreated	 in	 each	 moment.	 And	 creation	 requires	 patience:	 the
ability	to	tolerate	emptiness.

Trusting	the	Silence	Exercise

Having	an	open,	inquiring	attitude	requires	the	ability	to	tolerate	not	knowing
and	not	being	in	control	of	where	the	conversation	will	end	up.	As	you	learn	to
let	go	of	control,	you	learn	to	trust	yourself	 to	consider	another	person’s	views
without	 losing	 your	 own	 (holding	 differences)	 and	 to	 be	 okay	 even	when	 you
have	nothing	to	say	(embracing	silence).
Profound	things	happen	when	two	people	sit	face-to-face	and	openly	explore

their	feelings	toward	each	other	in	the	present.	In	my	workshops,	there	are	often
moments	when	two	people	are	beginning	to	engage	in	dialogue	and	then	one	or
both	will	quickly	escape	from	genuine	contact	by	going	into	a	story	or	a	theory,
only	 tangentially	 related	 to	 the	 here	 and	 now.	That’s	when	 I	 go	 into	 action	 as
their	 embracing	 silence	 coach.	 I	 ask	 Partner	 A	 to	 state	 a	 feeling	 she	 is
experiencing	in	relation	to	Partner	B.	Then,	before	B	can	escape	into	a	story	or	a
theory,	I	request	that	B	simply	pause,	take	in	what	A	shared,	and	then	check	in
with	himself	 to	 see	what	he	 is	experiencing	 right	now,	and	share	 that.	Then	A
does	the	same	thing	—	listen,	pause,	check	in,	feel,	and	then	respond	genuinely



to	B	about	how	she	is	feeling	right	now,	not	two	minutes	ago.	The	beauty	of	this
exercise	 it	 shows	 how	 feelings	 change	 from	moment	 to	 moment.	 If	 you	 give
yourself	the	space	to	feel	and	express	what	is	now,	what	is	 in	the	next	moment
will	 usually	 be	 different.	 In	 addition	 to	 helping	 people	 learn	 to	 be	 more
comfortable	 with	 silence,	 this	 exercise	 also	 helps	 them	 get	 more	 comfortable
with	change.	Ask	someone	you	know	to	try	this	exercise	with	you.	Sit	face-to-
face	 and	 take	 turns	 sensing	 the	 space	 between	 you,	 speaking	 from	 the	 silence
about	how	you	are	feeling	right	now	in	relationship	to	the	other.	In	responding	to
the	other,	be	with	your	present	experience	of	what	was	just	said	to	you.	Stay	with
this	experience	and	respond	to	what	you	just	heard	and	what	you’re	feeling	as	a
result.

Human	communication	is	an	alive,	ever-changing	creation	—
it	is	created,	re-created,	and	co-created	in	each	moment.	And
creation	requires	patience:	the	is	ability	to	tolerate	emptiness.

This	is	similar	to	the	pair	exercise	I	mentioned	in	chapter	9,	in	which	Partners
A	 and	 B	 take	 turns	 actively	 listening	 and	 sharing	 what	 the	 other’s	 sharing
triggers	in	them.	In	these	situations,	the	conversation	is	completely	spontaneous.
No	one	has	a	plan	for	how	it	should	go.	Both	people	are	open	to	being	surprised,
not	just	by	the	other,	but	by	themselves	as	well.	I	always	feel	moved	as	I	witness
two	people	 listening	 into	 and	 embracing	 silence.	 I	 can	 feel	 their	 tentativeness,
their	excitement,	their	aliveness.
When	 partners	 do	 this	 exercise,	 their	 communications	 tend	 to	 arise	 from	 a

deep	 level	of	 their	being,	 showing	 that	you	can	be	uncertain	of	where	you	are
going	 and	 still	 radiate	 presence.	 In	 fact,	 people	 seem	 more	 present	 in	 these
moments,	 perhaps	 because	 the	 situation	 demands	 a	 high	 level	 of	 open
attentiveness.	In	these	moments	of	heightened	spontaneity,	people	also	embody	a
sense	 of	 confidence,	 or	 self-trust,	 that	 I	 rarely	 see	 in	more	 controlled	 settings.
The	willingness	 to	 just	be	here	with	another	person,	not	knowing	the	outcome,
opens	up	vast	new	possibilities	—	unpredictable	and	uncontrollable.	As	we	learn
to	 trust	 the	 silence,	 we	 learn	 to	 trust	 the	 unknown	 and	 the	 chaotic,	 which	 I
suspect	are	where	true	creativity	springs	from.	From	my	own	experience,	I	know
that	when	I’m	feeling	creative,	I’m	feeling	confident.



When	partners	do	this...	their	communications	tend	to	arise
from	a	deep	level	of	their	being,	showing	that	you	can	be
uncertain	of	where	you	are	going	and	still	radiate	presence.	In
fact,	people	seem	more	present	in	these	moments,	perhaps
because	the	situation	demands	a	high	level	of	open
attentiveness.

If	people	are	unable	to	do	this	practice,	as	often	occurs	with	married	couples,
it	may	be	because	there’s	too	much	unfinished	business	between	them	for	them
to	be	able	 to	be	present.	Then	 it’s	 time	 to	do	 resentments	and	appreciations	or
one	of	the	other	clearing	practices.
Are	 we	 ready	 to	 simply	 be	 together	 in	 the	 mystery	 of	 not	 knowing	 what’s

coming	next,	 like	 the	 two	partners	 facing	each	other	without	 a	 script?	Can	we
tolerate	 the	 silence	 and	 stillness	—	and	 the	 slowness?	 If	we	 really	want	 to	 be
present	 in	 the	moment,	we’ll	 have	 to	 learn	 to	 slow	down	 and	pay	 attention	 to
what’s	bubbling	up	 in	our	 awareness	 right	now.	We’ll	need	 to	get	 comfortable
with	the	discomfort	of	not	knowing	and	simply	wait	to	see	what	comes,	even	if
we	 feel	 awkward.	 Remember,	 when	 you’re	 feeling	 uncertain	 or	 unsure	 about
what’s	 coming	 next,	 you	 can	 be	 pretty	 sure	 that	 you’re	 in	 touch	with	 present
reality.

Practices	to	Support	Embracing	Silence

I	have	a	 few	other	 favorite	practices	 for	helping	myself	and	others	get	more
comfortable	 with	 the	 silence	 of	 not-knowing:	 word	 fasting,	 partying	 without
words,	free	association,	and	meditation.
1.	Word	fasting.	Sometimes	if	a	friend	and	I	plan	to	spend	the	day	together,	we

will	agree	to	be	totally	silent	the	whole	time.	One	of	the	things	I	like	to	do	best
while	on	a	word	fast	is	to	take	a	long	hike	in	a	beautiful	natural	setting.	Looking
at	each	other,	touching,	pointing,	laughing,	and	any	form	of	nonverbal	contact	is
permitted,	but	no	 talking,	no	writing	notes	 in	 the	 sand,	no	 sign	 language.	This
kind	of	contact	can	be	a	wonderful	 thing	to	experience	with	someone	you	care
about.	After	the	day	is	over,	you	may	have	a	conversation	about	how	it	felt.



Profound	things	happen	when	two	people	sit	face-to-face	and
openly	explore	their	feelings	toward	each	other	in	the	present.

2.	Partying	without	words.	 I	occasionally	 invite	some	of	my	friends	over	for
an	improvisational	movement	and	dance	party.	It	is	agreed	beforehand	that	while
they	 are	 in	 my	 home,	 no	 one	 will	 speak.	 All	 forms	 of	 nonverbal	 contact	 are
allowed	and	encouraged.	This	practice	is	similar	to	word	fasting,	except	that	now
you’re	with	a	group,	and	there’s	music	to	move	and	dance	to.	None	of	the	music
I	play	has	any	audible	lyrics.
3.	Free	association.	Usually	I	do	this	practice	with	just	one	other	person,	but	it

could	 be	 done	 with	 a	 few	 people.	 It	 is	 modeled	 after	 the	 free-association
technique	used	by	Freud	and	other	psychoanalysts	since	Freud.	The	two	of	us	lie
on	a	bed	or	on	 the	 floor	 in	a	comfortable	nest	of	pillows	and	blankets	 that	we
have	created	for	 the	occasion.	We	just	 lie	 there,	maybe	 looking	at	one	another,
but	 not	 necessarily.	 When	 something	 to	 say	 bubbles	 up	 from	 either	 of	 our
subconsciouses,	we	speak	it	aloud.	It	could	be	something	related	to	the	present
situation,	 or	 it	 could	 be	 a	 memory,	 a	 feeling,	 a	 thought,	 a	 wish,	 a	 dream
fragment,	or	a	theory.	You	share	anything	and	everything	that	enters	your	mind,
uncensored.	We	 allow	 plenty	 of	 spaces	 between	 the	 sharings,	 and	 no	 effort	 is
made	 to	 have	 a	 conversation	—	 although	 if	 conversation	 happens,	 that’s	 okay
too.	The	experience	is	a	little	like	a	Quaker	meeting	lying	down!
4.	Meditation.	Meditation	 is	 usually	 practiced	 alone,	 but	 you	 can	 also	 do	 it

with	 a	 group	 or	 with	 just	 one	 or	 two	 others.	 There	 are	 many	 traditions	 of
meditation,	such	as	Zen,	Vipassana,	and	Transcendental	(TM).	There	are	also	a
number	 of	 acceptable	 postures,	 including	 sitting,	 standing,	 and	walking.	 I	will
not	attempt	to	describe	meditation	here,	but	I	do	include	a	number	of	resources
for	learning	this	practice	in	appendix	A,	“Resource	Guide.”
I	 recommend	 using	 these	 practices	 often	 as	 a	 way	 of	 tuning	 in	 to	 your

essential	being	and	your	ability	to	perceive	things	as	they	are.	Most	people	get	so
caught	 up	 in	 the	 ego-mind’s	 ideation	 and	 strategizing	 that	 they	 truly	 have	 lost
touch	with	reality.	I	had	a	meeting	a	few	weeks	ago	with	a	client,	Lonnie,	who
was	talking	about	how	she	wanted	a	more	intimate	connection	with	her	husband.
I	 asked	 Lonnie	 to	 put	 her	 husband,	metaphorically,	 in	 the	 empty	 chair	 across
from	her	and	to	tell	him	her	feelings	and	desires.	As	I	 listened	—	and	we	tape
recorded	 the	 conversation	 so	 she	 could	 hear	 herself	 too	—	 I	 realized	 that	 90
percent	 of	what	 she	 said	was	not	what	 she	wanted.	 It	was	why	 she	wanted	 it,



why	she	thought	it	would	be	good	for	them,	why	she	didn’t	want	to	bother	him
with	her	needs	—	why,	why,	why,	should,	should,	should.	There	was	very	little
concrete	picture,	feeling	tone,	or	description	of	what	she	was	proposing.	As	I	sat
there	imagining	being	her	husband	listening	to	her	words,	I	imagined	him	tuning
out	 about	 90	 percent	 of	 what	 she	 said.	 Lonnie	 imagined	 this	 too	 when	 she
listened	 to	 the	 tape.	She	recognized	 that	 the	whys	and	shoulds	 felt	safer	 to	her
and	that	her	desire	for	safety	was	killing	her	spontaneity.
When	she	was	faced	with	expressing	her	wants,	Lonnie’s	control	pattern	was

to	overexplain	and	 justify	 instead	of	 simply	saying	what	 she	wanted.	After	we
did	some	work	to	help	reveal	to	her	the	false	beliefs	at	work	in	her	unconscious,
I	 recommended	 that	 she	 and	 her	 husband	 engage	 in	 the	 free-association
technique	 to	help	Lonnie	allow	some	silences	between	her	words.	 I	hoped	 this
practice	would	help	her	unhook	 from	 the	patterned	way	she	expressed	herself,
that	it	would	give	her	a	chance	to	slow	down	and	notice	when	her	false	beliefs
about	“being	a	bother”	crept	in.	For	a	few	weeks,	they	did	this	practice	at	least
once	 a	 week.	 Lonnie	 also	 listened	 to	 the	 tape	 recording	 of	 her	 initial
conversation	with	 the	 empty	 chair	 a	 few	 times	—	 just	 to	 help	 her	 to	 be	more
aware	of	her	control	pattern.

Words	themselves	are	not	the	problem	but	rather	the
unconscious	way	we	use	words	in	the	service	of	our	control
patterns.

As	a	result	of	doing	these	things,	she	got	in	contact	with	a	deeper	level	of	her
truth,	 the	 level	 that	 has	 clear	 wants	 that	 do	 not	 need	 to	 be	 camouflaged	 by
explanations	 and	 apologies.	 Then	 she	 and	 I	 did	 another	 empty-chair	 dialogue
with	her	husband.	This	time	she	was	about	70	percent	concrete	and	specific.	She
was	 now	 able	 to	 show	 him,	 or	 take	 him	 there,	 with	 her	 words.	 Her	 picture
included	specifics	like:	“I	see	us	taking	walks	in	nature	and	looking	at	the	birds
and	listening	to	them	sing.	I	see	us	sitting	quietly	at	the	kitchen	table	and	looking
into	each	other’s	eyes.”
Recalling	this	story,	I	am	reminded	that	words	themselves	are	not	the	problem

but	 rather	 the	 unconscious	 way	 we	 use	 words	 in	 the	 service	 of	 our	 control
patterns.	 Practices	 such	 as	 word	 fasting	 and	 free	 association	 can	 help	 you
interrupt	 your	 patterned	 way	 of	 using	 words	 and	 learn	 to	 honor	 the	 silences
between	them.



Embracing	Silence	in	a	Nutshell

•	When	you	pause	and	allow	silences	between	your	words,	you	become	more
present.	You	allow	deeper	levels	of	truth	to	emerge	from	your	subconscious.

•	Embracing	silence	gives	you	a	chance	to	fully	experience	what	you	feel	and
to	fully	take	in	what	you	are	hearing.

•	Pause	before	speaking	—	to	check	in	with	yourself,	to	get	grounded	in	your
bodily	sensations,	and	to	connect	with	the	other.	During	this	silence,	energy
is	building	to	support	the	contact	between	you.

•	Take	your	applause.
•	Try	the	Quaker-meeting	format	in	a	group	you	belong	to.
•	Practice	meditation	regularly	to	help	you	learn	to	be	still	within.	This
practice	opens	up	channels	of	listening	to	yourself	that	you	would	not
otherwise	be	sensitive	to.

•	Notice	how	often	you	ask	and	how	often	you	tell,	how	often	you	make	space
and	how	often	you	take	space.	A	balance	of	both	is	best.

•	Help	your	mind	learn	to	tolerate	and	value	silence	by	practicing	word	fasting
and	free	association	with	a	partner.

•	To	really	make	contact	with	another	person,	you	must	be	willing	to	enter	into
a	realm	of	uncertainty	together.	Be	willing	to	become	unattached	to	what’s
coming	next,	to	embrace	uncertainty,	ambiguity,	and	even	potential	chaos.



CHAPTER	12
SERENITY,	PRESENCE,	AND

COMPASSION

Now	that	you	know	what	the	ten	truth	skills	are	and	how	to	practice	them,	this
chapter	 will	 describe	 the	 payoff	—	what	 you	 will	 get	 for	 your	 efforts	 if	 you
commit	yourself	to	the	practice	of	Getting	Real.
Serenity,	presence,	and	compassion	are	the	three	words	that	best	describe	the

qualities	we	begin	to	embody	when	we	Get	Real.	Serenity	refers	to	the	calmness
and	inner	peace	that	come	from	knowing	you	are	okay,	no	matter	what	happens
to	you.	Presence	is	the	energetic	aliveness	and	attentiveness	that	say	you’re	open
and	available	for	anything	that	life	may	bring.	Compassion	is	your	ability	to	be
moved	 or	 touched	 by	 others’	 real	 misfortune	 or	 suffering	 without	 becoming
dramatic	or	sentimental	and	without	needing	to	find	fault	or	blame.
When	 I	 experience	 serenity,	presence,	 and	compassion	 in	a	unified	way,	my

body	and	mind	feel	completely	relaxed,	and	yet	I	have	an	open	attentiveness	to
my	surroundings	that	enables	me	to	be	immediately	responsive	if	need	be.	I	feel
a	relaxed	attentiveness	alongside	a	sense	of	harmony	or	unity	with	the	world.	I
am	not	identified	with	my	personality	or	my	personal	story,	but	I	am	able	to	use
these	to	connect	with	the	world	in	whatever	ways	feel	most	whole	and	truthful	at
the	time.

Serenity

Throughout	this	book,	I	have	referred	to	the	ego-mind’s	need	to	control.	When
you	 are	 operating	 from	 this	 need,	 you	 think	 things	 have	 to	 be	 a	 certain	 way
before	you	can	feel	okay.	When	you’re	in	this	mind-set,	you	will	not	experience
serenity.	Your	peace	of	mind	will	be	constantly	threatened,	because,	after	all,	so
many	 things	are	not	 in	your	control.	On	 the	other	hand,	when	you	are	open	 to
experiencing	 and	 learning	 from	 everything	 —	 every	 disappointment,	 every



surprise,	and	every	piece	of	feedback,	whether	laudatory	or	critical	—	then	you
cannot	be	threatened.	When	your	priority	is	to	be	open	to	using	what	is	for	your
spiritual	 evolution,	 you	 will	 see	 the	 genuine	 benefit	 of	 every	 situation	 you
encounter	—	because	no	matter	what	happens,	you	always	learn	something	from
it.	You	really	can’t	lose!
As	 you	 grow	 in	 your	 capacity	 to	 experience	 what	 is,	 you	 stop	 trying	 to

manipulate	reality	to	conform	to	your	comfort	zone.	You	more	easily	accept	your
thoughts,	 your	 actions,	 and	 your	 circumstances.	You	 take	 life	 as	 it	 comes.	On
this	Getting	Real	journey,	you	come	to	identify	yourself	as	the	noticer	or	witness
of	your	 thoughts	and	actions	 instead	of	being	 identified	with	your	social	 roles,
your	accomplishments,	or	your	ideas	about	yourself.

When	you	are	open	to	experiencing	and	learning	from
everything	—	every	disappointment,	every	surprise,	and
every	piece	of	feedback,	whether	laudatory	or	critical	—	then
you	cannot	be	threatened.

This	witness	consciousness	is	an	internal	point	of	focus	or	inner	spaciousness.
You	hold	a	space	with	your	attention,	and	many	things	occur	within	that	space.
You	sense	a	 consistency	 in	your	essential	being	 that	 stays	with	you,	no	matter
what	 is	happening	 in	your	 external	world	or	 in	 your	mind.	This	 sense	of	 your
essential	being	is	not	easily	threatened,	allowing	you	to	feel	peaceful	and	serene.
As	noticer	or	witness,	you	are	open	to	experiencing	what	is.	Nothing	needs	to	be
excluded.	You	do	not	take	sides.	If	your	mind	is	comparing,	 judging,	or	 taking
sides,	 the	 witness	 notices	 this.	 Serenity	 comes	 from	 identifying,	 not	 with	 the
push-pulls	 or	 ups	 and	 downs	 of	 your	 external	 circumstances	 or	 fluctuating
emotional	states,	but	with	consciousness	itself.	You	“become”	the	stream,	not	the
cork	bobbing	along	in	the	current	of	the	stream.

Serenity	comes	from	identifying,	not	with	the	push-pulls	or
ups	and	downs	of	your	external	circumstances	or	fluctuating
emotional	states,	but	with	consciousness	itself.

If	 the	 control	 freak	 in	 you	 likes	 feeling	 on	 top	 of	 things,	 try	 shifting	 your



identity	 to	 that	 of	 the	noticer,	 and	you	will	 really	 be	on	 top	of	 things!	But,	 of
course,	it	won’t	matter	very	much,	because	there’s	nothing	to	prove,	nothing	to
defend	 against,	 nothing	 to	 get	 on	 top	 of.	 Serenity	 comes	 when	 you	 are	 not
depending	 on	 getting	 your	 way	 to	 feel	 good.	 Your	 happiness	 becomes
unconditional.	No	one	and	nothing	can	take	away	your	ability	 to	be	aware	and
accepting	in	 the	moment.	The	choice	to	accept	or	resist	 the	moment	 is	entirely
up	to	you.	Once	you	trust	that	you	are	in	charge	of	your	inner	state,	you	can	stop
worrying	about	something	happening	to	disturb	your	peace	of	mind.
Another	theme	related	to	serenity	discussed	throughout	this	book	is	that	if	you

express	what	 is	 in	your	 foreground,	 it	will	 soon	change.	Knowing	 this,	you	do
not	confuse	a	particular	emotional	state	with	who	you	are.	Nor	do	you	need	to
fear	 that	 something	 terrible	will	 happen	 if	 you	 share	 your	 emotions.	You	 trust
your	moment-to-moment	ebb	and	 flow.	Thoughts	and	emotions	come	and	 they
go.	No	matter	what	you	are	experiencing,	it	will	change.
As	 you	 practice	 experiencing	what	 is,	 you	 attain	more	 perspective;	 you	 see

from	 a	 wider	 vantage	 point.	 You	 discover	 that	 jobs,	 money,	 admirers,
possessions,	 good	 moods,	 bad	 moods,	 lucky	 breaks,	 failures,	 and	 misfortune
come	and	go.	Anything	you	have	 today	may	be	gone	 tomorrow.	Anything	you
don’t	 have	 could	 appear	 at	 any	 time.	 Experiencing	what	 is	 helps	 you	 draw	 a
bigger	 circle	 around	 the	 ups	 and	 downs	 of	 your	 existence.	 The	 ups	 and	 the
downs	are	not	separate.	Together	they	comprise	your	life,	your	hero’s	journey.	A
broader,	 more	 inclusive	 perspective	 tends	 to	 even	 things	 out,	 to	 mitigate	 the
extremes,	to	unify	the	opposites.
When	 you	 become	 better	 at	 noticing	 and	 sharing	 your	 self-talk,	 you	 get

perspective	on	your	mind	chatter.	You	see	that	it	isn’t	right	or	wrong.	It	just	is.
You	come	to	accept	it	without	praise	or	blame.	You	learn	to	share	it,	partly	in	the
interest	of	transparency,	partly	as	a	way	of	helping	you	stay	in	the	present	as	the
noticer	or	witness,	and	partly	as	a	way	of	getting	completion.	Taking	the	broader
perspective	of	 the	noticer	helps	you	 take	challenges	and	unwanted	surprises	 in
stride.

Experiencing	what	is	helps	you	draw	a	bigger	circle	around
the	ups	and	downs	of	your	existence.

As	you	learn	to	accept	what	is,	you	become	more	able	to	let	other	people	have
their	 reactions	 to	 you	 —	 positive,	 negative,	 or	 neutral.	 Your	 sense	 of	 safety



becomes	 internal	 —	 something	 nobody	 can	 take	 away.	 You	 are	 more	 self-
trusting,	knowing	you	aren’t	dependent	on	others	to	make	you	feel	safe.
Experiencing	 what	 is,	 being	 transparent,	 sharing	 mixed	 feelings,	 holding

differences,	welcoming	feedback,	asserting	what	you	want	and	don’t	want,	and
embracing	 silence	all	 support	 serenity,	because	 they	bring	you	 into	 the	present
moment.	You	are	connecting	and	relating	to	more	of	what	there	is	to	feel	related
to.	 The	more	 connected	 you	 are	 to	 yourself,	 to	 others,	 or	 to	 the	 situation,	 the
greater	will	be	your	overall	sense	of	well-being.

Presence

The	greatest	gift	you	can	give	yourself	and	others	is	your	free,	open	attention:
your	 presence.	 Although	 presence	 as	 a	 concept	 is	 somewhat	 intangible,	 when
you	 are	 truly	 present,	 you	 can	 feel	 it	 energetically,	 and	 so	 can	 others.	As	 you
become	more	spacious	and	more	able	to	attend	to	what	is	happening	within	your
current	 awareness,	 you	 become	more	 present.	 Presence	 begins	 with	 attention.
You	have	all	your	energy	and	attention	available	to	you	as	the	noticer,	so	you	can
participate	fully	in	each	moment	of	your	life.
I	think	most	of	us	miss	too	many	of	our	present	moments.	Many	of	us	are	tied

to	 the	 past,	 reliving	 or	 trying	 to	 live	 down	 old	 fears.	Others	 of	 us	 tend	 to	 get
ahead	of	ourselves,	 focusing	more	on	how	we	want	 things	 to	 turn	out	 than	on
being	 open	 to	 each	 moment	 as	 it	 comes.	 Mostly,	 we	 run	 away	 from	 the
uncertainty	and	aliveness	of	the	present	moment	by	thinking	about	it	(assessing
it,	 judging	 it,	 comparing	 it	 to	 something	 else,	 planning	 how	 to	 get	 it	 to	 last)
instead	of	experiencing	it.
The	more	aware	you	are	of	your	actual	experience	in	each	moment,	the	more

present	you	are.	You	may	become	aware	that	you	are	not	very	present,	that	you
are	distracted	by	your	judgments	or	other	mind	chatter,	or	that	you	are	caught	up
in	a	story	based	on	the	past.	Through	learning	to	notice	your	mind	chatter	or	self-
talk,	you	always	have	a	way	of	getting	back	into	present	time.

Presence	begins	with	attention.	You	have	all	your	energy	and
attention	available	to	you	as	the	noticer,	so	you	can
participate	fully	in	each	moment	of	your	life.



Another	way	of	affirming	your	presence	is	to	notice	and	share	your	intent	as	a
part	of	your	message.	For	example,	when	Dana	says,	“I’m	going	to	tell	you	a	bit
of	 my	 story	 about	 past	 relationships	 before	 I	 say	 what’s	 going	 on	 now,”	 it’s
easier	 for	 us	 to	 listen	 to	 her	 story.	We	 know	 that	 she	 is	 aware	 of	what	 she	 is
doing.	And	by	sharing	in	this	way,	she	is	giving	us	credit	for	being	aware	also.

Through	learning	to	notice	your	mind	chatter	or	self-talk,	you
always	have	a	way	of	getting	back	into	present	time.

To	be	present,	 you	need	 to	be	 relating	 to	what	 is	 happening	now	—	 in	 this
situation,	with	this	person,	in	your	current	state.	A	very	important	aspect	of	your
current	 state	 is	 your	 foreground,	 whatever	 is	 uppermost	 in	 your	 awareness.
When	you	try	to	suppress	a	thought	or	feeling	or	to	push	it	into	the	background,
your	 demeanor	will	 give	 you	 away.	Your	 communication	won’t	 be	 congruent.
You’ll	 be	 saying,	 “I’m	doing	 great!”	while	 slumping	 and	 looking	 down	 at	 the
ground	or	“I	have	no	problem	with	what	you’re	saying”	in	a	voice	that	sounds
angry.	The	 self-awareness	 that	 comes	 from	practicing	 the	 ten	 truth	 skills	helps
you	notice	when	your	words	and	actions	don’t	 jibe.	As	you	Get	Real,	you	will
come	 to	 take	 for	 granted	 that	we’re	 all	 pretty	 transparent	 in	 our	 incongruities.
You	also	learn	these	giveaways	are	no	big	deal.	All	you	need	to	do	is	admit	that
you	notice	them,	and	that	brings	you	present	again.
Your	 mental	 habits	 are	 what	 keep	 you	 from	 being	 present	 —	 habits	 like

making	 judgments,	 having	 expectations,	 and	 filling	 in	 the	 blanks.	 Honest
communication	 about	 any	 of	 these	 things	 always	 brings	 you	 back	 into	 the
present.	So	if	you	notice	yourself	going	into	an	automatic	self-criticism	pattern,
for	example,	share	your	self-talk	about	noticing	this.	This	will	bring	you	back	to
now.	By	letting	go	of	the	need	to	be	right,	safe,	and	certain	in	favor	of	being	real,
unique,	 and	 open	 to	 surprise,	 you	 affirm	 yourself	 as	 a	 living,	 ever-changing
presence	—	participating	in	life’s	changes	instead	of	trying	to	control	them.	As
such	a	presence,	you	are	in	constant	and	immediate	exchange	with	the	world	and
the	 people	 around	 you	 —	 always	 in	 flux,	 always	 in	 relationship.	 You	 are
energetically	alive.	People	can	feel	you	when	you	come	into	a	room.	When	you
look	at	them,	they	feel	seen.	When	you	listen,	they	feel	heard.	When	you	speak,
they	listen.
Only	when	you	become	unattached	 to	 how	others	 behave	 or	 how	 life	 treats

you	 can	 you	 be	 truly	 present.	 A	 circle	 of	 mutual	 causality	 is	 at	 work	 here,



because	it	is	also	true	that	the	more	present	you	are,	the	easier	it	is	to	let	go	of
such	attachments.	But	as	with	any	new	skill,	practice	is	essential.	So	be	grateful
for	those	moments	of	presence,	and	keep	practicing.

Compassion

Compassion	 allows	 you	 to	 experience,	 accept,	 and	 love	what	 is,	 even	when
doing	so	involves	pain	or	suffering.	It	 is	the	ability	to	be	moved	or	affected	by
others’	 feelings.	 As	 we	 saw	 from	 the	 group	 exercise	 in	 chapter	 3,	 in	 which
people	share	their	darkest	secrets,	your	compassion	grows	as	you	become	more
honest	 about	 your	 darker,	 hidden	 aspects,	 the	 traits	 you	 find	 shameful,	 the
actions	you	don’t	want	others	to	know	about.	And	paradoxically,	as	you	accept
these	darker	parts	 through	compassion	 for	yourself,	 they	 tend	 to	be	 influenced
and	come	into	alignment	with	the	more	beneficial	aspects	of	your	nature.	They
are	transformed	by	the	light.
You	also	need	compassion	when	relating	to	the	wounded	inner	child	—	yours

and	 other	 people’s.	 As	 I	 have	 often	 repeated,	 you’re	 big	 now.	 But	 you	 carry
inside	the	conditioned	fears	and	beliefs	of	your	childhood.	You	don’t	need	to	be
protected	from	the	truth,	but	you	do	need	to	be	treated	with	kindness	when	the
truth	hurts,	even	if	that	hurt	is	only	a	pain	in	the	ego.

Through	being	transparent,	you	learn	that	you	are	most
lovable	when	you	are	most	transparent	—	that	people	want	to
love	you	if	you	will	just	let	yourself	be	seen.	And	maybe,	if
you	let	yourself	be	seen	fully	by	yourself,	you’ll	find	an	equal
willingness	within	to	forgive	and	to	love.

Through	being	transparent,	you	learn	that	you	are	most	lovable	when	you	are
most	transparent	—	that	people	want	to	love	you	if	you	will	just	let	yourself	be
seen.	And	maybe,	 if	 you	 let	 yourself	 be	 seen	 fully	 by	 yourself,	 you’ll	 find	 an
equal	willingness	within	 to	 forgive	and	 to	 love.	When	we	 look	honestly	at	our
feelings	 and	 thoughts,	 many	 people	 notice	 harsh	 judgments	 about	 themselves
and	 others.	 You	 become	 compassionate	 by	 embracing	 everything,	 even	 your
judgments.	You	embrace	your	ego-centered	mind	chatter,	your	inner	critic,	your
attachments.	 Accepting	 your	 taboo	 thoughts	 and	 feelings	 is	 a	 powerful	 act	 of



compassion	 toward	 yourself,	 especially	 those	 “spiritually	 incorrect”	 thoughts
about	 how	 other	 people	 should	 be.	When	 you	 share	 your	 self-talk	 about	 your
judgments	in	a	spirit	of	“confession,”	of	being	transparent,	you	take	the	sting	out
of	it.

You	don’t	have	to	protect	others	—	because	you	have	learned
that	being	honest	is	the	best	way	to	stay	connected	to	others,
to	your	own	flow,	and	ultimately	to	that	greater	energy	source
from	which	you	both	partake.

Your	 compassion	 will	 grow	 as	 you	 practice	 Getting	 Real	 with	 like-minded
friends,	 friends	 who	 agree	 to	 learn	 in	 public,	 trusting	 that	 all	 mistakes	 or
awkwardness	will	be	forgiven	and	often	celebrated.	Even	anger	and	resentment
can	 be	 shared	 with	 compassion.	 As	 you	 share	 these	 feelings,	 you	 feel	 your
connection	to	the	other,	your	caring.	You	don’t	have	to	protect	others	—	because
you	have	learned	that	being	honest	is	the	best	way	to	stay	connected	to	others,	to
your	own	flow,	and	ultimately	to	that	greater	energy	source	from	which	you	both
partake.

Using	the	Ten	Truth	Skills

I	hope	you	are	feeling	safer	now	about	living	your	life	a	bit	closer	to	the	edge.
The	world	needs	your	truth	and	your	aliveness.	It	needs	more	people	who	truly
participate	 in	 life	 and	 take	 responsibility	 instead	 of	 sitting	 on	 the	 sidelines
criticizing	or	complaining.	If	you	are	ready	to	change	the	rules	of	the	game	you
play	by,	here	are	some	things	you	can	do:

1.	Give	a	copy	of	this	book	to	at	least	one	friend.
2.	Discuss	with	them	the	idea	of	practicing	the	truth	skills	with	each	other.
3.	Send	for	the	Getting	Real	Card	Game,	and	invite	your	friends	over	to	play	it
with	you.	This	is	a	safe,	fun	way	to	begin	the	conversation	about	“changing
the	rules	of	the	game.”	You’ll	find	a	description	of	the	game,	including
sample	questions	and	ordering	information,	in	appendix	C.

4.	Trust	yourself.	Leap	joyfully	into	the	unknown!



Getting	Real	in	a	Nutshell

•	Getting	Real	keeps	your	energy	moving.	You’ll	feel	more	alive	after
practicing	the	ten	truth	skills,	because	your	life	energy	will	be	flowing,	not
constricted	and	confined.

•	Getting	Real	keeps	relationships	alive.	Practicing	the	ten	truth	skills	keeps
your	relationships	from	becoming	stagnant.	You	get	in	the	habit	of
expressing	and	releasing	instead	of	holding	on	to	grievances.	When	partners
store	up	withheld	feelings,	a	wall	grows	between	them	that	can	only	be
broken	down	by	getting	the	energy	moving	again	through	self-expression.

•	Getting	Real	sets	you	free.	When	you	know	how	to	notice	and	stay	with	an
uncomfortable	experience,	you	have	true	freedom.	You	are	not	compelled	by
your	conditioning	to	need	things	to	be	a	certain	way	for	you	to	feel	okay.
You	are	not	controlled	by	your	need	to	avoid	certain	feared	outcomes.

•	Getting	Real	creates	a	shift	in	your	identity.	Your	ability	to	identify	yourself
as	the	noticer	helps	you	to	attain	freedom.	As	the	noticer,	your	ego	is	not
who	you	are.	You	do	not	identify	the	ego’s	pain	as	your	pain.	It’s	simply	a
pain	in	the	ego.

•	Getting	Real	keeps	you	present.	By	practicing	the	truth	skills,	you	become
better	at	noticing	when	your	mind	tries	to	take	you	out	of	your	present
experience	and	into	a	control	pattern.	You	learn	to	interrupt	your	mind	and	to
speak	what	you	notice,	which	brings	you	back	into	the	present.

•	Getting	Real	helps	you	stay	with	an	experience	to	completion.	Whenever	you
allow	yourself	to	stay	with	an	experience,	resisting	the	mind’s	attempts	to
distract	you	and	take	you	out	of	the	experience	through	various	control
patterns	and	addictions,	that	experience	will	change.	The	way	out	of	a
painful	experience	is	by	going	into	and	through	it.	This	allows	you	to
complete	the	unexpressed	feelings	from	your	past	so	that	you	can	move
beyond	them.

•	Getting	Real	opens	your	mind	up	to	new	possibilities.	When	you	are	not
attached	to	a	particular	state,	such	as	comfort,	you’ll	have	no	reason	to	resist
what	is.	You’ll	be	able	to	perceive,	take	in,	and	relate	to	more	of	what	is
going	on	in	the	moment.	You	will	become	more	resourceful.	You’ll	see	the
options	and	possibilities	(and	even	the	dangers)	of	a	situation	more	fully	and
clearly,	because	your	attention	will	be	freer.	It	won’t	be	constricted	by	the
tensing	and	tightening	that	come	from	strategizing	and	watching	for	danger.



•	Getting	Real	fosters	intimacy.	To	experience	true	intimacy	with	another
person,	you	must	enter	a	realm	of	uncertainty	together.	Getting	Real	gives
you	the	ability	to	trust	that	you	can	handle	unplanned	or	unexpected
outcomes.

•	Getting	Real	enhances	creativity	and	creative	problemsolving.	One	of	the
biggest	blocks	to	creativity	is	having	your	mind	clogged	with	unfinished
business	stemming	from	incomplete	communications	and	inhibited	self-
expression.	Practicing	the	ten	truth	skills	keeps	your	mental	energy	flowing
so	your	attention	is	available	for	dreaming	up	novel	ways	to	do	things.
Another	block	to	creativity	is	attachment	to	being	right,	safe,	or	certain.
When	you	discover	the	joys	of	being	real,	unique,	and	open	to	surprise,	your
mind	muscles	relax	so	you	can	see	things	in	new	ways.	Holding	differences
is	another	important	prerequisite	for	solving	complex	problems.	It	allows
you	to	see	the	mutually	beneficial	relationships	between	things	that	the	mind
might	ordinarily	think	of	as	separate.

•	Getting	Real	develops	your	intuition.	Relating	(versus	controlling)	helps	you
develop	a	very	sensitive,	even	telepathic,	resonance	with	your	surroundings.
This	opens	up	your	intuition	—	a	resource	that	is	likely	to	be	helpful	as	the
information	explosion	continues	to	boggle	and	confound	the	logical	mind.
By	speaking	aloud	what	you	imagine,	you	are	really	testing	your	hunches.
By	being	open	to	feedback,	you	see	whether	your	imaginings	are	valid.	And
by	being	free	and	fluent	in	your	self-expression,	you	allow	hunches	to
emerge	into	the	foreground	of	your	conscious	mind	from	the	depths	of	your
subconscious	mind.

•	Getting	Real	speeds	up	evolution.	If	you	shorten	the	time	between	when	a
feeling,	thought,	or	intuition	is	felt	and	when	it	is	expressed	and	“gotten
over,”	you	move	through	your	changes	more	quickly	and	with	less
unnecessary	resistance.	You	find	out	more	quickly	if	your	decisions	and
actions	are	producing	the	results	you	want,	so	you	can	change	your	course	in
time	to	head	off	unintended	outcomes.



APPENDIX	A
RESOURCE	GUIDE

As	 a	 culture	we	 are	 starting	 to	wake	up	 to	our	 ingrained	habits	 of	 denial	 and
dishonesty.	Getting	Real	(via	 the	 ten	truth	skills)	 is	simply	one	expression	of	a
trend	in	our	society	toward	more	authentic	relating.	In	this	appendix,	I’ve	listed
books,	tapes,	and	workshops	that	relate	to	the	work	of	Getting	Real.	(If	you	have
or	know	of	a	book	or	other	resource	that	is	not	listed	here	but	should	be,	feel	free
to	send	it	to	me	for	possible	inclusion	in	future	editions	of	this	Resource	Guide.)

Books

Blanton,	Brad.	Radical	Honesty:	How	to	Transform	Your	Life	by	Telling	the
Truth.	New	York:	Dell,	1996.

———.	Practicing	Radical	Honesty:	How	to	Complete	the	Past,	Live	in	the
Present,	and	Build	a	Future.	Stanley,	VA:	Sparrowhawk	Publishing,	2000.

Bradshaw,	John.	Family	Secrets.	New	York:	Bantam,	1996.
Campbell,	Susan.	The	Couple’s	Journey:	Intimacy	as	a	Path	to	Wholeness.
San	Luis	Obispo,	CA:	Impact,	1980	(out	of	print	but	available	from	the
author	at	www.susancampbell.com).

———.	Beyond	the	Power	Struggle:	Dealing	with	Conflict	in	Love	and	Work.
San	Luis	Obispo,	CA:	Impact,	1984	(out	of	print	but	available	from	the
author	at	www.susancampbell.com).

———.	From	Chaos	to	Confidence:	Survival	Strategies	for	the	New
Workplace.	New	York:	Simon	&	Schuster,	1995.

Dreaver,	Jim.	The	Way	of	Harmony.	New	York:	Avon,	1999.
Fritz,	Robert.	Corporate	Tides.	San	Francisco:	Berrett-Koehler,	1996.
Glickstein,	Lee.	Be	Heard	Now.	New	York:	Broadway	Books,	1998.
Hendricks,	Gay,	and	Kathlyn	Hendricks.	Conscious	Loving.	New	York:
Bantam,	1990.

http://www.susancampbell.com
http://www.susancampbell.com


———.	The	Conscious	Heart.	New	York:	Bantam,	1997.
Katie,	Byron.	All	War	Belongs	on	Paper	(available	from	the	Work	Foundation,
P.O.	Box	667,	Manhattan	Beach,	CA	90267).

Kramer,	Joel,	and	Diana	Alstad.	The	Guru	Papers:	Masks	of	Authoritarian
Power,	Berkeley,	CA:	Frog,	1993.

Lowe,	Paul.	The	Experiment	Is	Over,	1989	(available	from	the	author	at
www.ineachmoment.com).

———.	In	Each	Moment.	Vancouver,	BC:	Looking	Glass	Press,	1998.
Mauer,	Rick.	Beyond	the	Wall	of	Resistance:	Unconventional	Strategies	That
Build	Support	for	Change.	Austin,	TX:	Bard	Books,	1996.

Mindell,	Arnold.	The	Leader	as	Martial	Artist.	San	Francisco:	HarperCollins,
1992.

Perls,	Fritz.	The	Gestalt	Approach	and	Eyewitness	to	Therapy.	New	York:
Bantam,	1976.

Ross,	Doug.	A	Tao	of	Dialogue:	A	Manual	of	Dialogic	Communication.	Blue
Hill,	ME:	Medicine	Bear	Publishing,	1998.

Schutz,	Will.	The	Truth	Option.	Berkeley,	CA:	Ten	Speed	Press,	1984.
Simmons,	Annette.	A	Safe	Place	for	Dangerous	Truths:	Using	Dialogue	to
Overcome	Fear	and	Distrust	at	Work.	New	York:	Amacom,	1999.

Tolle,	Eckhart.	The	Power	of	Now.	Novato,	CA:	New	World	Library,	1999.

Videotapes

Campbell,	Susan.	How	to	Build	a	Loving	Relationship.	Available	by	e-mailing
me	at	drsusan@susancampbell.com.	1	hour,	1996.

CRM	Films.	Riding	the	Wave:	Strategies	for	Change.	Available	by	calling
CRM	at	(800)	421-0833.	17	minutes,	1999.

Thinking	Allowed.	One-hour	interviews	with	leading-edge	thinkers	(including
Susan	Campbell	on	“The	Couple’s	Journey”).	Contact
www.spider12.lanminds.com/index.html.

Prices	of	tapes	available	at	www.susancampbell.com

Workshops,	Talks,	and	Retreats

http://www.ineachmoment.com
http://drsusan@susancampbell.com
http://www.spider12.lanminds.com/index.html.
http://www.susancampbell.com


Arica	Institute,	Dobbs	Ferry,	NY:	(914)	674-4091
Brad	Blanton,	Radical	Honesty	Enterprises:	www.radicalhonesty.com
Susan	Campbell,	Getting	Real	Seminars:	www.susancampbell.com
Dialogue	Groups,	Annette	Simmons:	e-mail	AnnetteGPC@aol.com
Gay	and	Kathlyn	Hendricks,	Hendricks	Institute:	www.hendricks.com
Byron	Katie,	The	Work	Foundation:	P.O.	Box	667,	Manhattan	Beach,	CA
90267

Landmark	Education,	Forum:	www.landmarkeducation.com
The	Learning	Annex:	www.thelearningannex.com
Paul	Lowe:	www.ineachmoment.com
Omega	Institute:	www.omega.org
Rowe	Conference	Center,	Massachusetts:	(413)	339-4954
Speaking	Circles,	Lee	Glickstein:	www.speakingcircles.com
Spirit	Rock	Meditation	Center:	www.spiritrock.org	(Woodacre,	CA)
Vipassana	Meditation	Retreats:	www.dhiravamsa.org	(U.S.A.	and	Europe)

Gift	Items,	Novelties,	and	Games

“For	the	Little	Ones	Inside”	(deck	of	inspirational	quotations).	Available	from
the	 author:	 Robyn	 Posin,	 Box	 725,	 Ojai,	 CA,	 (805)	 646-4518,
www.forthelittleonesinside.com
The	Getting	Real	Card	Game	 (a	 game	of	 self-disclosure	 and	 fun	 for	 two	 to

fourteen	people,	ages	eight	and	up.	Available	from	the	author:	Susan	Campbell,
4373	 Hessel	 Ct.,	 Sebastopol,	 CA	 95472,	 (707)	 829-3646,	 e-mail:
drsusan@susancampbell.com,	www.susan-campbell.com
The	 Truth	 at	 Work	 Card	 Game	 (a	 team-building	 game	 for	 work	 groups).

Available	 from	 the	 author:	 Susan	Campbell,	 4373	Hessel	 Ct.,	 Sebastopol,	 CA
95472,	 (707)	 829-3646,	 e-mail:	 drsusan@susancampbell.com,
www.susancampbell.com,	www.thegettingrealgame.com

Getting	Real	On-line	Community

Join	 the	 Getting	 Real	 “listserve”	 to	 meet	 and	 share	 your	 truth	 with	 people
from	 all	 over	 the	 world	 who	 have	 read	 this	 book	 or	 attended	 one	 of	 Susan

http://www.radicalhonesty.com
http://www.susancampbell.com
http://www.AnnetteGPC@aol.com
http://www.hendricks.com
http://www.landmarkeducation.com
http://www.thelearningannex.com
http://www.ineachmoment.com
http://www.omega.org
http://www.speakingcircles.com
http://www.spiritrock.org
http://www.dhiravamsa.org
http://www.forthelittleonesinside.com
http://www.drsusan@susancampbell.com
http://www.susan-campbell.com
http://www.drsusan@susancampbell.com
http://www.susancampbell.com
http://www.thegettingrealgame.com


Campbell’s	workshops.	Drop	a	note	to	drsusan@susancampbell.com	for	sign-up
instructions.

http://www.drsusan@susancampbell.com


APPENDIX	B
COMMUNICATION	GUIDELINES

FOR	GETTING	REAL

We	 work	 with	 the	 following	 guidelines	 in	 the	 Getting	 Real	 workshops*	 and
monthly	Honesty	Salons.	At	the	start	of	each	group,	after	a	brief	check-in	circle,
we	read	these	guidelines	aloud,	each	person	taking	a	turn	reading	one	of	them.
Then	we	all	agree	to	use	these	guidelines	to	help	us	stay	present	and	connected
to	one	another.
If	you	wish	to	form	your	own	group,	you	may	find	using	these	guidelines	very

helpful.	Keep	in	mind,	however,	that	these	guidelines	are	only	useful	if	everyone
has	 read	 this	 book	 and	 played	 the	 Getting	 Real	 Card	 Game	 a	 few	 times,
preferably	with	the	same	people.	Participants	need	to	understand	what	self-talk	is
and	 to	 be	 fairly	 fluent	 in	 sharing	 their	 self-talk.	 They	 also	 need	 to	 have	 some
ability	to	give	and	receive	experience-based	feedback	(as	opposed	to	interpretive
feedback);	and	they	need	to	know	the	distinction	between	the	two.	If	people	have
taken	at	least	one	Getting	Real	workshop	and	have	read	the	book	and	played	the
card	 game,	 there	 is	 a	 greater	 likelihood	 that	 these	 guidelines	 can	 be	 put	 into
practice.	I	am	available	by	phone	to	coach	people	in	starting	their	own	Honesty
Salons.	I	am	also	available	to	come	to	your	location	to	work	with	your	group	to
get	things	started.

Here	are	the	guidelines:*

1.	Connect	with	the	other(s)	before	speaking.	Look	into	people’s	eyes.	Feel
your	bodily	sensations	and	your	breathing.

2.	Speak	from	your	own	experience:	I	feel,	I	want,	I	see,	I	notice,	I	observe,	I
think,	I	imagine,	I	like,	I	don’t	like,	I	appreciate	you	for...,	I	resent	you	for...,
I	fear,	I’m	angry,	I	feel	hurt,	I’m	sad,	I’m	disappointed.	Use	I	statements	to
keep	yourself	in	your	experience.	When	sharing	resentment	or	appreciation,
be	specific	about	what	the	other	said	or	did.



3.	Be	conscious	of	your	intent:	Is	it	to	offer	support,	energy,	or	attention?	To
get	support	or	agreement?	To	get	the	other	to	do	something	or	feel
something?	To	hurt	or	get	back	at	the	other	or	to	prove	the	other	wrong?	Or
is	it	to	share	feelings	and	thoughts	in	the	interest	of	transparency	or	in	order
to	get	over	them?	Your	intent	is	part	of	your	message.	Ask	yourself:	Is	my
intent	to	control	or	to	relate?

4.	Communicate	about	your	here-and-now	experience.	Reveal	your	self-talk,
such	as,	“I	am	saying	to	myself,	‘I	hope	I’m	coming	across	as	genuine.’”	If
you	are	having	a	recollection,	label	it	as	that.	For	example,	“Right	now,	I’m
remembering	my	dad’s	face	after	he	hit	me.”	If	you	are	carrying	hurt	or
resentment	about	a	past	interaction,	you	can	say,	“I’m	remembering	the	hurt
I	felt	when	you	said	.	.	.”	or	“I	resent	you	for	saying...”

5.	In	giving	feedback,	be	concrete.	Tell	the	person	specifically	what	she	did	or
said	that	triggered	this	response	in	you,	using	the	form:	“When	you...,	I	felt
(or	thought	or	said	to	myself)...”

6.	If	you	are	judging	someone,	label	it	as	a	judgment:	“I	notice	I’m	judging
you	right	now.	What	I’m	thinking	is...	“

7.	If	you	are	making	an	interpretation	about	a	person,	label	it	as	an
interpretation.	For	example,	“My	fantasy	about	you	is	that	you’re	feeling
sad”	or	“I	imagine	you’re	feeling	sad.”

8.	Check	in	often	with	yourself,	sensing	what’s	happening	in	your	body.
Support	your	feelings	with	your	breath.

9.	Don’t	speak	unless	you	are	moved	to	do	so.	Do	not	answer	a	question	if	you
don’t	feel	like	answering	it.	Just	say,	“I	don’t	feel	like	answering	that	right
now.”

10.	Be	honest	in	your	listening.	Don’t	fake	interest.

The	 premise	 of	 these	 guidelines	 is	 that	 you	 are	 responsible	 for	 your	 own
experience.	Whatever	you	are	experiencing	is	a	mirror	of	where	you	are	 in	 the
moment.	Your	experience	is	uniquely	yours.	Validation	by	others	doesn’t	make	it
right.	Disagreement	doesn’t	make	it	wrong.	Your	honest	feedback	or	response	is
the	greatest	gift	you	can	give	to	another	person.

*	If	you	copy	and	distribute	these	guidelines	please	note	that	it	came	from	this
book.

*	Someone	in	the	group	needs	to	take	responsibility	for	helping	people	stay	true



to	these	guidelines.



APPENDIX	C
DESCRIPTION	AND

ORDERING	INFORMATION
FOR	CARD	GAMES

The	Getting	Real	Card	Game

This	 card	 game	 is	 for	 two	 to	 fourteen	 players,	 ages	 eight	 and	 up.	 The	 idea
behind	the	Getting	Real	Card	Game	is	that	it’s	more	fun	to	tell	the	truth	than	it	is
to	lie,	pretend,	and	conform	to	others’	expectations.	Playing	the	game	offers	you
a	chance	to	explore	truth	telling	as	a	doorway	to	greater	aliveness	and	self-trust.
As	 you	 play,	 you’ll	 be	 developing	 the	 ten	 basic	 truth	 skills	 described	 in	 this
book.	These	truth	skills	will	empower	you	to	communicate	more	openly	and	to
get	 over	 any	unnecessary	 concern	you	may	have	 about	 how	other	 people	may
react	to	your	honesty.	During	the	game,	you	will	be	asked	to	share	your	self-talk,
create	your	own	“wild	cards,”	and	communicate	with	the	intent	to	relate,	not	to
control.	 The	 results	 are	 often	 profound,	 always	 provocative,	 frequently
heartwarming,	sometimes	disturbing,	but	mostly	hilarious.
Players	 take	 turns	 answering	 self-revealing	 questions.	 These	 questions	 are

printed	on	the	cards,	which	are	placed	in	four	different	stacks,	representing	four
levels	 of	 challenge.	 You	 get	 more	 points	 for	 answering	 the	 more	 challenging
questions.	After	answering	a	question,	you	then	ask	for	feedback	from	the	other
players.	If	you	wish	to	pass	on	a	particular	question,	you	may	share	your	in-the-
moment	 self-talk	 instead	 of	 answering.	You	 can	 play	 this	 game	over	 and	over
with	the	same	or	different	people.	It	gets	richer,	and	people	get	funnier,	the	more
you	 play	 it.	 The	 game	 can	 be	 played	 at	 various	 levels	 of	 self-disclosure,
depending	on	the	people	involved.	The	instruction	booklet	includes	suggestions
for	the	host/hostess,	or	“game	master,”	on	how	to	customize	the	game	for	your
particular	group	—	so	that	it	is	challenging	enough	to	be	interesting,	but	not	so
challenging	that	people	feel	unsafe.



Here	is	some	sample	text	from	the	cards:

Go	around	the	room	and	say	one	thing	you	notice	about	each	person.
What	question	would	you	not	want	to	be	asked	on	a	first	date?
What	specific	feedback	do	you	have	for	the	person	whose	turn	it	was	just
before	yours?

What	is	the	biggest	lie	you	have	ever	told	(or	one	of	the	biggest)?
Tell	us	about	a	situation	in	which	you	imagine	being	reluctant	to	tell	the
complete	truth.

As	a	child,	what	career	did	you	aspire	to?
How	safe	do	you	imagine	people	feel	telling	you	exactly	what	they	are
thinking?

Pick	the	person	here	whom	you	know	best	and	say	three	words	that	describe
your	relationship	to	this	person.

What	were	you	like	in	high	school?

The	game	consists	of	250	cards	and	an	instruction	booklet.	Cost:	$25
WARNING:	Playing	this	game	may	push	the	edges	of	your	comfort	zone.
Here’s	what	a	few	people	had	to	say	about	the	game:

“I	played	 the	Getting	Real	Game	with	my	family	when	I	visited	my	parents
for	Thanksgiving.	My	three	brothers	and	their	wives	and	children	were	all	there
too.	 The	 ages	 ranged	 from	 ten	 to	 eighty-five.	 I	 got	 to	 know	 things	 about	my
brothers	(we’re	all	in	our	forties	and	fifties)	that	I	never	knew	—	like	how	they
feel	about	their	lives,	their	work,	and	their	relationships,	and	their	hopes,	dreams,
and	regrets.	It	was	so	good	for	the	kids	to	see	their	parents	being	so	real.	And	the
kids	were	great.	In	the	“wild	cards,”	they	asked	some	deep	questions	about	life
and	love	that	really	challenged	us	and	gave	us	a	new	understanding	of	the	kinds
of	concerns	they	have.	Now	we	play	Getting	Real	whenever	we	all	get	together.”

—	psychologist,	age	fifty-nine

“I	brought	the	game	to	my	men’s	group.	These	are	men	in	all	walks	of	life	—
the	 building	 trades,	 farming,	 teaching,	 the	 arts.	 It	was	 an	 amazing	 experience.
Many	 of	 their	 responses	 brought	 tears	 to	my	 eyes	—	 sometimes	 because	 they
were	so	moving,	and	sometimes	because	they	were	so	funny!	Playing	the	game
together	brought	us	to	a	new	level	of	sharing	with	each	other.”



—	teacher,	age	forty

“I	asked	some	people	over	 to	play	 the	game.	 I	had	some	 fears	about	how	 it
would	go.	What	I	found	out	was	that	everyone	there	had	been	wishing	for	more
connection	with	people.	Playing	the	game	together	gave	us	that.	We’ve	played	it
together	three	times	so	far,	and	it’s	never	the	same.	It	seems	to	get	better,	more
fun	and	interesting,	every	time.”

—	small	business	owner,	age	forty-six

The	Truth	at	Work	Card	Game

The	Truth	at	Work	Card	game	is	a	game	of	self-expression,	skill	building,	and
fun	 for	work	groups.	 It	offers	work	groups	a	 lively,	 structured	way	 to	develop
trust,	 thus	 enhancing	 the	 group’s	 ability	 to	 make	 good	 decisions,	 take
cooperative	action,	continually	improve	performance,	and	accept	people	for	who
they	are.	People	 learn	that	 love	and	acceptance	are	powerful	forces	 in	bringing
out	each	person’s	best.	They	also	 learn	 that	constructive,	challenging	 feedback
can	be	delivered	with	respect,	care,	and	humor.
The	game,	which	is	 the	result	of	more	than	twenty-five	years	of	research	on

how	 to	 build	 high-performing	 teams,	 teaches	 such	 truth	 skills	 as	 the	 ability	 to
distinguish	between	your	actual	 experience	and	your	beliefs	or	 assumptions.	 It
helps	people	be	more	present	to	the	realities	of	their	current	situation.	The	game
also	focuses	on	improving	group	members’	ability	to	speak,	hear,	and	learn	from
other	 people	 about	 such	 important	 topics	 as	 trust,	 vision,	 mission,	 values,
culture,	 individual	 strengths	 and	 challenges,	 decision	 making,	 conflict,
personality	 styles,	meetings,	 leadership,	 rewards,	and	coping	with	change.	 It	 is
designed	to	be	led	by	a	trained	group	facilitator.
Like	 the	 Getting	 Real	 Card	 Game,	 it	 also	 presents	 players	 with	 questions

written	on	cards	and	can	be	customized	to	fit	the	culture	and	comfort	level	of	the
group.	You	get	more	points	for	answering	the	more	challenging	questions.	After
answering	 a	question,	 you	 then	 ask	 for	 feedback	 from	 the	other	players.	 Ifyou
wish	 to	pass	on	a	particular	question,	you	may	share	your	 in-the-moment	 self-
talk	instead	of	answering.
Here	is	some	sample	text	from	the	cards:

What	are	you	passionate	about?



What	would	you	like	to	be	valued,	acknowledged,	or	given	credit	for?
Tell	us	something	that	you	think	might	change	our	opinion	ofyou.
Tell	us	about	one	of	your	most	embarassing	moments.
What	is	your	truth	in	this	moment?
What	help	do	you	need	from	others	here	to	do	your	job	better?
What	help	would	you	like	to	offer	to	anyone	here	to	help	them	be	more
effective	in	his	or	her	job?

Name	one	thing	you	think	would	improve	our	group’s	ability	to	deal	with
conflict.

In	which	instances	while	working	here	have	you	been	rewarded	or	appreciated
for	your	honesty?

If	you	could	lay	down	some	ground	rules	to	make	our	meetings	more
effective,	what	would	they	be?

Who	in	this	group	do	you	wish	you	had	a	stronger	relationship	with?
Who	here	do	you	seek	feedback	from	in	the	normal	course	of	your	job?
Toward	what	end?

The	game	consists	of	250	cards.
Cost:$50	(plus	facilitator’s	fee,	if	applicable)

Here’s	what	a	few	people	had	to	say	about	the	game:

“We	played	 the	Truth	 at	Work	Card	Game	 the	night	we	all	 arrived	before	 a
three-day	 team-building	 retreat.	 It	 broke	 down	 barriers	 to	 trust	 and	 got	 us
relating	as	human	beings	instead	of	as	our	roles.	I	think	it	gave	our	retreat	a	good
jump-start,	so	we	got	more	accomplished.”

—	manager,	age	thirty-five

“I	brought	Susan	in	to	try	the	game	out	with	our	top	team.	I	felt	so	much	trust
in	 the	 group	 after	 that.	 I	 found	 myselfgoing	 to	 people	 and	 asking	 for	 their
feedback	—	and	really	listening	to	them	in	a	deeper	way.	I	guess	I’m	just	more
relaxed	around	here	now.	We	will	definitely	do	this	again.”

—	CEO,	age	fifty-five

Order	Form



I	am	ordering___sets	of	the	Getting	Real	Card	Game	($25)
I	am	ordering___sets	of	the	Truth	at	Work	Card	Game	($75)

Name	______________________
Address	____________________
Phone	______________________
Fax	________________________
E-mail	______________________
Website	_____________________

Enclosed	is	check/money	order	for______.
Bill	my	credit	card	#______________________.
Expires______.

Send	to:	Susan	Campbell
4373	Hessel	Court

Sebastopol,	CA	95472
Phone:	(707)	829-3646
Fax:	(707)	823-6789

E-mail:	drsusan@susancampbell.com
Websites:	www.susancampbell.com

www.thegettingrealgame.com

http://www.drsusan@susancampbell.com
http://www.susancampbell.com
http://www.thegettingrealgame.com


INDEX

A
ambivalence,	15

See	also	emotions,	sharing	mixed
anger	and	resentment:	ability	to	express,	115

fear	of	expressing,	xv,	41-42,	169-70
angry	people,	belief	that	it	is	unsafe	to	talk	back	to,	xv,	41-42
applause,	taking	one’s,	184-85
approach-avoidance.	See	contact-withdrawal	exercise
asserting	wants	and	don’t	wants,	8-9,	105-8,	120-21

false	beliefs	about,	109-10
assertion:	aim	of,	111

allows	use	of	imagination,	116-17
in	dating,	111-14
leads	to	intimacy,	115-16

assertion	styles,	as	control	patterns,	118
assertiveness:	unconsciously	linked	with	discontentedness,	109-10
attachment	to	outcome/results,	189-90,	205
authenticity	and	authentic	responses,	11

See	also	specific	topics

B
being,	xi
being	real:	ways	of	not,	1-2

See	also	specific	topics
“belief	gone	mad”,	32-33
beliefs:	filtering	perceptions	through	strongly	held,	83-84



how	they	happen,	30-32
impairing	ability	to	see	what	is,	32-33
letting	go	of	unconscious,	42-44
See	also	false	beliefs

bioenergetics	(yes-no)	exercise,	117-18
blame,	134,	157

responding	to,	131-34
See	also	projections

bodily	sensations,	observing,	39,	43
boundaries,	personal,	116

marking	one’s,	114-15

C
Campbell,	Susan,	xxii

From	Chaos	to	Confidence:	Survival	Strategies	for	the	New	Workplace,	72
life	history,	xiii-xv

changing	one’s	mind,	10
child	abuse,	healing	the	wounds	of,	186-88
children,	sharing	mixed	emotions	with,	173-74
choices,	noticing	one’s,	38
clearing	rituals.	See	feedback	rituals

resentments/appreciations	(“R	and	A”)	clearing	practice
codependency,	134
communication:	honest	(see	honesty)

true	intent	of,	87
unconscious	static	in,	80-81

communication	guidelines	for	Getting	Real,	213-15
community,	creating	real,	52-53
compassion,	199,	205-6
complaints,	as	wants	in	disguise,	119
confusion,	172-73
contact-withdrawal	exercise,	157-58
control:	illusions	about	being	in,	71,	79,	182



letting	go	and	getting	comfortable	with	not	being	in,	71-73
mistrust	and,	82
staying	in,	5-6

control-oriented	communication,	5,	6,	67-68
See	also	experiencing	vs.	interpreting

control	patterns,	82-87,	126,	131,	132
breaking	out	of	play-it-safe,	107

controlling:	benefits	of	relating	over,	78-80
pitfalls,	80-81
vs.	relating,	xii,	6,	67,	69-70,	75-76
self-assessment	quiz,	69

controlling	game:	as	the	right,	safe,	and	certain	game,	74-76
controlling	mind,	70
cooperation,	154-55
couples	workshops,	117
crying,	15-17
curious	child	exercise,	114-15

D
dating,	139

getting	real	in,	42-44
self-assertion	in,	111-14

differences,	holding,	10,	151-52,	166-67
in	marriage,	161-63
self-assessment	quiz,	153-54
staying	present	exercise,	164-66
at	work,	159-61

discomfort,	28
dangers	of	avoiding,	94
getting	comfortable	with,	71-72
See	also	specific	topics

diversity,	152
dominance	and	submission,	false	dichotomy	between,	151



dualistic	thinking,	151-52

E
ego,	158

pain	in	the,	27-28
protecting	one’s,	28-29

ego	identity,	28
ego	minds,	29
ego	transcendence,	163
emotional	triggers:	getting	one’s	buttons	pushed,	84-85,	128-29

See	also	specific	topics
emotions,	sharing	mixed,	10-11,	169-70,	177-78

appropriate	times	for,	175-76
with	children,	173-74
confusion,	172-73
with	family,	171-72
in	marriage,	174-75
self-	assessment	quiz,	170-71
See	also	feelings

empty	chair	technique,	196-97
experience,	distinguishing	between	what	we	imagine	and	what	we,	19
experiencing	vs.	interpreting	exercise,	23-25
experiencing	vs.	interpreting	other	person’s	behavior,	21-23,	37-40
experiencing	what	is,	7,	17,	19,	27,	29,	30,	35-36,	46,	200

asserting	wants	and	don’t	wants	and,	106
with	a	mate,	21-23,	38,	39
practicing,	201-2
in	relationships,	20-21
self-assessment	quiz,	17-19
See	also	what	is

experiencing	what	is	calling	out	to	be	experienced,	avoiding,	17



F
false	belief	exercise,	110-11
false	beliefs,	xiii-xv

that	something	is	better	than	nothing,	181-82
See	also	specific	topics

family,	sharing	mixed	emotions	with,	171-72
family	therapy,	145
fear(s):	automatically	responding	to	one’s	worst	internal,	22-23;
“favorite”,	47-49,	84-85

freedom	and,	51-52
interfering	with	honest	communication,	91
knowing	one’s,	49-50
See	also	control
trust

feedback,	68
consequences	of	appearance	closed	to	or	uninterested	in,	89-93
and	importance	of	being	approachable,	89-93
offering	constructive,	101-2
practices	for	receiving,	99-101
reasons	for	seeking,	94-96
self-	assessment	quiz,	93-94
welcoming,	8,	89-91,	97,	102-3

feedback	practices,	96-97
feedback	rituals,	97-99
feelings:	changes	in	one’s,	10

experiencing	them,	as	one	takes	action,	38
honest	expression	of,	3-4,	21,	22,	37-38
judging	and	censoring/suppressing,	15-17
must	be	shut	down	to	make	others	comfortable,	xiv,	38
taboo,	expressed	in	the	here	and	now,	61-62
trying	to	control	rather	than	admitting	one’s,	3-5
unexpressed,	as	creating	static	in	communication,	80
See	also	emotions



forgiveness.	See	making	amends
free	association,	195-97
friendship,	relating	in,	77-78

G
Games	People	Play	(Berne),	83
Gestalt	therapy,	107
gesturing	automatically,	85
Getting	Real,	xvi,	207-8

objectives,	120
underpinnings	of,	xvii
what	it	is	about,	xvi
the	work	of,	xvii,	xxi
See	also	specific	topics

Getting	Real	Card	Game,	xxi,	53,	217-19
Getting	Real	workshops,	25,	157,	213
Glickstein,	Lee,	184-85
groups,	embracing	silence	in,	183-84

H
hero’s	journey,	29-30,	35
honesty,	xi,	xii

difficulty	with,	41
impossibility	of	perfect,	143
using	it	to	stay	with	one’s	experience,	xvi-xviii

hypocrisy,	pervasiveness	of,	xviii-xx

I
“if	only”	exercise,	129-30
imaginary	danger,	28-29
intent:	noticing	one’s,	8,	88



uncovering	true,	87
interpretations:	distinguishing	them	from	actual	behavior,	127
interpreting.	See	experiencing	vs.	interpreting

noticing	vs.	imagining	exercise
intimacy,	xii,	58
“I,	you”	statements,	58-59

J
Jesus	Christ,	9
judging	one’s	feelings,	15-17
judging	others,	avoiding	painful	feelings	by,	xv
judgmental	self-talk,	133-34
judgments,	125

expressing	(vs.	acting	out),	62-63
See	also	“shoulds”

L
lies,	44-46

admitting	to,	146-48
listening,	133

active,	99-101,	158-59
spacious,	191-92

lying,	reasons	for,	2

M
making	amends,	144-45
making	amends	exercise,	144-45
manipulation,	170
marriage:	being	transparent	in,	50-51

holding	differences	in,	161-63
mixed	feelings	in,	174-75



taking	back	projections	in,	134-36
meditation,	155-56

embracing	silence	using,	185-89,	196
micromanagement,	123-24
“mind	chatter”,	22,	26,	27

N
“new	human	capacities”,	4-6
“No”,	difficulty	saying,	112-13
noticing,	200-202
noticing	vs.	imagining	exercise,	25-27
noticing	what’s	happening	exercise,	33-34

O
other	people’s	reactions,	stopping	taking	them	personally,	120

P
pain:	avoiding/resisting	vs.	accepting,	28

See	also	discomfort
patterned	way	of	speaking,	85-86
perfectionism,	142-44
Perls,	Fritz,	28
presence,	131-32,	164-66,	199,	203-5
projections:	‘fessing	up	about	one’s,	125-27,	133-34

how	to	receive,	132-33
“if	only”	exercise,	129-30
noticing	one’s,	126-27,	129-30
outer	struggles	mirroring	inner	conflicts,	124-25
responding	to,	131-32
self-assessment	quiz,	127-28
taking	back,	9,	123-24,	130,	131,	134-37



See	also	relationships,	fighting	about	meanings	attributed	to	partner’s	actions
protecting	people,	xiv,	38,	53-54
psychodrama,	112-13

Q
Quakers,	184
questions,	feeling	a	need	to	answer	all,	119-20

R
Radical	Honesty	cult,	xii
real	self,	doesn’t	need	protecting,	34-35
relating,	78

defined,	70
experiencing	true	contact	with	other	people,	7,	22
in	friendship,	77-78
helps	us	trust	others	and	ourselves,	81-82
to	what	is	happening	now,	204
See	also	under	controlling

relationships:	fighting	about	meanings	attributed	to	partner’s	actions,	21
trying	to	get	them	to	conform	to	our	expectations,	4-5

resentments/appreciations	(“R	and	A”)	clearing	practice,	56,	187
suggestions	for	regular,	56-59

revising	an	earlier	statement,	139-40,	142-44,	149
going	out	and	coming	back	in	exercise,	142
making	amends,	144-46
Monday	morning	quarterback	process,	140-42
self-assessment	quiz,	140
steps	to	take	when,	148-49

S
screaming,	15,	16



script(s),	3,	181
identifying	with	one’s	story	or,	83

secrets,	44-46
Secrets	Exercise,	44-45
self-acceptance,	xx-xxi,	44,	142-43
self-assertion

See	assertion
self-awareness:	developing,	xviii

See	also	truth	skills,	as	awareness	practice
self-awareness	exercises,	33-34
self-disclosure,	7-8,	51-52
self-expression,	7-8,	73-74,	201

See	also	specific	topics
self-realization,	xviii,	xix
self-respect,	5
self-suppression,	15-17
self-talk,	34,	133-34,	202,	203

replaying	the	same	self-talk	over	and	over,	86-87
self-trust,	81-82
serenity,	199-202
sexual	attitudes	and	values,	differences	in,	161-63
sexual	encounter	with	mate,	writing	about	ideal,	117
sexual	needs,	asserting,	106-8
shame,	131
“shoulds”,	xix-xx,	6,	124

focusing	on	what	“should	be”	vs.	what	is,	27
See	also	feelings,	judging	and	censoring

silence,	growing	wall	of,	81
silence	(of	not	knowing):	asking	vs.	telling,	190-91

embracing,	11,	179-81,	183-89,	195-98
self-assessment	quiz,	182-83
trusting,	192-95
See	also	uncertainty

space,	personal.	See	boundaries



Speaking	Circles,	184-85
speaking	in	a	patterned	way,	85-86
staying	present	exercise,	164-66

T
transparency,	7-8,	205-6

asserting	wants	and	don’t	wants	and,	106
Being	Transparent,	63-65
being	transparent	exercise,	46-47
in	marriage,	50-51
with	parents,	59-61
self-assessment	quiz,	40-42

trust:	feedback	as	enhancing,	95
viewing	universe	as	friendly	vs.	unfriendly	place,	83

trusting	the	silence	exercise,	192-95
truth,	4

not	conforming	to	our	ideas	about	how	things	should	be,	4
Truth	at	Work	Card	Game,	220-21
truth	skills,	ten,	7-11,	38,	40,	42

as	awareness	practice,	11-13
using	the,	206-7
See	also	specific	skills

U
uncertainty:	entering	a	realm	of,	with	another	person,	7,	81-82

getting	comfortable	with	the	discomfort	of,	71-72,	81-82
knowing	vs.	not	knowing,	181-82
using	it	to	connect,	189-90
See	also	silence	(of	not	knowing)

unfinished-business	exercise,	54-55
unity,	from	despair	to,	155-57



W
want(s),	xiv

differing,	158
(see	also	differences)
getting	punished	for	expressing	them	too	strongly,	xiii
See	also	asserting	wants	and	don’t	wants

what	is,	7,	8,	11-12,	158,	193
accepting,	202
(see	also	self-acceptance)
loving,	205
noticing,	29
openness	and	availability	to,	132
valuing	being	comfortable	vs.	valuing	seeing,	75
vs.	what	we	imagine,	19
See	also	experiencing	what	is
“What	is,	is”,	28

whatever	is,	11
witness	consciousness,	200-202
word	fasting,	195
words,	partying	without,	195
workplace:	getting	real	at,	2-4

holding	differences	at,	159-61
need	for	control	at,	68-69

Y
yes-no	exercise,	117-18



ABOUT	THE	AUTHOR

Susan	Campbell	has	written	five	previous	books	on	interpersonal	relationships:
Expanding	Your	Teaching	Potential:	Education	for	Participation	in	a	Changing
World	(Irvington,	1977),	The	Couple’s	Journey:	Intimacy	as	a	Path	to	Wholeness
(Impact,	 1980),	 Earth	 Community:	 Living	 Experiments	 in	 Cultural
Transformation	 (Island,	 1982),	 Beyond	 the	 Power	 Struggle:	 Dealing	 with
Conflict	 in	 Love	 and	 Work	 (Impact,	 1984),	 and	 From	 Chaos	 to	 Confidence:
Survival	Strategies	for	the	New	Workplace	(Simon	&	Schuster,	1995).	Her	books
have	been	translated	into	French,	Spanish,	Portuguese,	Japanese,	and	German.
Susan	and	her	Learning/Discovery	approach	to	communication,	conflict,	and

change	are	the	subject	of	a	twenty-minute	professional	training	video	produced
in	 1999	 by	 CRM	 Films.	 The	 film	 and	 accompanying	 workbook	 are	 widely
distributed	 to	 Fortune	 500	 companies	 and	 to	 government	 agencies.	 As	 an
internationally	 known	 professional	 speaker	 and	 seminar	 leader,	 Susan	 is
constantly	 in	 front	 of	 audiences.	She	publishes	 a	 newsletter	 entitled	Uncertain
Times,	which	she	offers	free	to	clients	or	anyone	wishing	to	be	on	her	e-mailing
list.	She	 is	 also	 creator	 of	 the	one-day	 seminar	Getting	Real,	which	 is	 gaining
popularity	in	the	San	Francisco	Bay	Area.	And	she	hosts	regular	Honesty	Salons
one	evening	a	month	at	her	home.	Susan	lives	in	Sebastapol,	California.



H	J	Kramer/New	World	Library	is	dedicated	to
publishing	books	and	audiocassettes

that	inspire	and	challenge	us	to	improve	the	quality
of	our	lives	and	our	world.

Our	books	and	tapes	are	available
in	bookstores	everywhere.

For	a	catalog	of	our	complete	library
of	fine	books	and	cassettes,	contact:
H	J	Kramer/New	World	Library

14	Pamaron	Way
Novato,	CA	94949

Phone:	(415)	884-2100
Fax:	(415)	884-2199

Or	call	toll-free	(800)	972-6657
Catalog	requests:	Ext.	50

Ordering:	Ext.	52
E-mail:	escort@nwlib.com

Website:	www.newworldlibrary.com

http://www.newworldlibrary.com

	Cover
	Title
	Copyright
	Dedicaiton
	Contents
	ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
	FOREWORD
	INTRODUCTION
	ONE: How to Stop Being Right and Start Being Real
	TWO: Experiencing What Is: To Get Where You Need to Go, Be Where You Are
	THREE: Being Transparent: Freedom’s Just Another Word for Nothing Left to Hide
	FOUR: Noticing Your Intent: Is It to Relate or to Control?
	FIVE: Welcoming Feedback: It’s How We Learn
	SIX: Asserting What You Want and Don’t Want: Supporting Your Feelings with Action
	SEVEN: Taking Back Projections: Discovering Your Other Side
	EIGHT: Revising an Earlier Statement: It’s Okay to Go Out and Come In Again
	NINE: Holding Differences: Seeing Other Viewpoints Without Losing Your Own
	TEN: Sharing Mixed Emotions: You’re Not Crazy, You’re Complex
	ELEVEN: Embracing the Silence of Not Knowing: Entering the Fertile Void
	TWELVE: Serenity, Presence, and Compassion
	APPENDIX A: Resource Guide
	APPENDIX B: Communication Guidelines for Getting Real
	APPENDIX C: Description and Ordering Information for Card Games
	INDEX
	ABOUT THE AUTHOR

