


































	



	

Snow	Lion	Publications

605	West	State	Street

P.O.	Box	6483

Ithaca,	NY	14851

607-273-8519

www.snowlionpub.com

Copyright	©	2002	by	Tenzin	Wangyal

All	right	reserved.	No	portion	of	this	book	may	be	reproduced	by	any	means	without	prior
written	permission	from	the	publisher.

ISBN	1-55939-176-6

Printed	in	Canada	on	acid-free	recycled	paper.

Library	of	Congress	Cataloging-in-Publication	Data

Wangyal,	Tenzin.

Healing	with	form,	energy	and	light	:	the	five	elements	in	Tibetan	Shamanism,	Tantra,	and
Dzogchen	/	Tenzin	Wangyal	Rinpoche.

p.	cm.

Includes	bibliographical	references.

ISBN	1-55939-176-6

1.	Rdzogs-chen	(Bonpo).	2.	Spiritual	life—Bonpo	(Sect)	3.	Spiritual	life—Tantric	Buddhism
4.	Bonpo	(Sect)—Doctrines.	I.	Title.

BQ7982.3.	.W345	2002

299’.54—dc21																																							2002000288



	

CONTENTS
Preface

The	Prayer	of	the	Intermediate	State

Introduction

The	Bön	Religion

ONE:	The	Elements

Three	Levels	of	Spiritual	Practice

External

Internal

Secret

Relating	to	the	Sacred

The	Five	Pure	Lights

The	Dissolution	of	the	Elements

Understanding	Through	the	Elements

Relating	Oneself	to	the	Elements

Earth

Water

Fire

Air

Space

The	Elements	and	Our	Well-Being

How	the	Elements	Become	Unbalanced

The	Arising	of	Problems

Purification	and	Cultivation

Knowing	Which	Element	to	Work	With

Working	with	the	Elements

Choosing	the	Level	of	the	Practice

TWO:	The	Five	Elements	in	Shamanism

La,	Yee,	and	Sem

La,	Sok,	and	Tse

Practices

Working	with	the	Elements	in	Nature

The	Nine	Purification	Breaths

Earth

Water



Fire

Air

Space

Dedication

Elemental	Spirits

Relating	to	Non-Physical	Beings

First	Guests

Second	Guests

Third	Guests

Fourth	Guests

Making	Offerings

Soul	Loss	and	the	Retrieval	of	the	Elemental	Energies

The	Arrow,	Turquoise,	and	Soul	Deer

The	Practice	of	Retrieving	the	Elemental	Energies

Outline	of	the	Practice

The	Nine	Purification	Breaths

Guru	Yoga

The	Four	Guests

The	Transformation	of	the	Body

The	Transformation	of	the	Energy

Retrieving	the	Elemental	Energies

The	Transformation	of	the	Mind

The	Long	Life	Mantra

Dedication

The	Goddess	Practice	with	the	Other	Elements

The	Practice	in	Daily	Life

THREE:	The	Five	Elements	in	Tantra

The	Horse,	Path,	Rider,	and	Armor

The	Horse:	Prana

The	Functions	of	the	Five	Pranas

The	Path:	Channels

The	Rider:	Tigle

The	Armor:	Syllables

Aspects	of	Tantra

Chakras

Positive	and	Negative



Supporting	Positive	Qualities

The	Practice	of	Tsa	Lung

Posture

Breath	and	Prana

Transformation	in	Holding	and	Releasing

Instructions

The	Five	External	Tsa	Lung	Movements

The	Five	Internal	Tsa	Lung	Practices

The	Five	Secret	Tsa	Lung	Practices

Opening	the	Chakras

FOUR:	The	Five	Elements	in	the	Great	Perfection

The	Great	Perfection

Creating	Samsara

The	Six	Lamps

Sound,	Light,	and	Rays

Being	with	Problems

Dissolving	Samsara

Appreciating	the	Space	Element

Integrating	with	Space	and	the	Other	Four	Lights

The	Dark	Retreat:	Visions	of	the	Five	Elements

FIVE:	Final	Words

Glossary

Bibliography

Appendix	1:	Astrological	Directions

Appendix	2:	List	of	Contacts

Appendix	3:	The	Prayer	of	the	Intermediate	State



	

H.H.	the	Dalai	Lama	at	Menri	Bönpo	Monastery	in	India



	

This	book	is	dedicated	to:

H.	H.	The	Dalai	Lama

H.H.	Lungtok	Tenpa’i	Nyima	Rinpoche

Yongzin	Tenzin	Namdak	Rinpoche

and	all	the	teachers	from	whom	I	have	learned



PREFACE
	

For	 the	 last	 fifteen	 years	 I	 have	 been	 interested	 in	 understanding	 the	 five	 elements
because	such	an	understanding	is	important	in	so	many	levels	of	the	Bön	tradition.	During
this	time	I	have	researched	the	five	elements	and	have	maintained	a	close	relationship	to
the	elemental	goddesses	 through	practice.	When	 I	had	questions	about	 the	elements	or
about	 practices	 with	 the	 elements,	 I	 prayed	 to	 the	 elemental	 goddesses.	 In	 dreams	 I
received	their	teachings	and	their	blessings.	These	and	other	experiences	motivated	me	to
write	this	book

Although	all	 the	teachings	 in	the	book	are	based	on	ancient	texts,	 there	 is	also	much	 in
the	 manner	 of	 conveying	 the	 teachings	 that	 is	 rooted	 in	 my	 own	 understanding	 and
experience.	 Not	 wanting	 to	 write	 anything	 that	 contradicted	 the	 teachings,	 I	 checked
many	 of	 the	 points	 with	 my	 teacher,	 Lopon	 Tenzin	 Namdak	 Rinpoche,	 and	 with	 other
learned	 Geshes	 in	 Nepal	 and	 India	 when	 I	 was	 there	 in	 2000.	 I	 am	 grateful	 for	 their
guidance.	Their	enthusiasm	and	joy	about	the	book	and	the	encouragement	they	gave	me
was	a	great	support.	Though	I	followed	their	direction,	any	remaining	errors	or	confusions
are	entirely	mine.

For	some	years	I	have	been	teaching	the	elemental	practices	to	my	students	around	the
world.	 It	 has	 made	 me	 happy	 to	 witness	 the	 positive	 results	 of	 these	 practices	 in	 my
students’	 personal	 lives	 and	 in	 their	 spiritual	 growth.	 I	 would	 like	 to	 thank	 all	 those
students	who	have	done	the	elemental	practices.

I	 thank	 all	 those	 who	 have	 been	 long-time	 supporters	 of	 my	 work	 to	 bring	 the	 Bön
teachings	 to	 the	 West,	 especially	 Gerald	 and	 Barbara	 Hines	 and	 Murari	 and	 Prachi
Garodia.	 Without	 their	 continued	 support,	 it	 would	 have	 been	 much	 more	 difficult	 to
develop	the	Ligmincha	Institute	and	to	accomplish	its	work.

I	 thank	 all	 the	 people	 at	 Snow	 Lion	 Publications	 for	 their	 generosity	 and	 kindness,
particularly	 Christine	 Cox,	 whose	 wonderful	 editing	 skills	 have	 improved	 this	 book	 in
every	way.

I	 thank	Mary	Ellen	McCourt	 for	all	her	 time	and	her	skillful	help	with	graphics.	 I	 thank
Radek	Dabrowski	for	supplying	the	line	drawings	in	the	book,	not	once,	but	also	a	second
time	after	the	first	drawings	were	lost	in	the	mail.

For	reading	and	commenting	on	the	manuscript	at	different	stages,	and	for	offering	many
suggestions	 that	 have	 improved	 the	 book,	 I	 thank	 Laura	 Shekerjian,	 Alejandro	 Chaoul,
Cecile	Clover,	and	John	Jackson.	I	am	grateful	to	Steven	Goodman	for	suggestions	on	an
early	 version	 of	 the	 text	 and	 for	 corrections	 he	 made	 to	 the	 glossary.	 I	 thank	 Susan
Yenchick	for	her	support.

I	especially	want	to	thank	my	close	friend	and	student,	Mark	Dahlby.	Mark	offered	many
thoughts	and	suggestions	that	have	made	this	book	more	accessible	to	Western	readers.
Without	his	joyful	effort,	this	book	would	not	have	been	realized.

Shenla	Odkar



THE	PRAYER	OF	THE
INTERMEDIATE	STATE:	THE

PRECIOUS	GARLAND
	

A	OM	HUNG

In	the	intermediate	state	that	is	this	life,	the	present	moment,

one	does	not	realize	one’s	own	mind	and	is	distracted	by	deluded	activities,

does	not	remember	impermanence	and	death,

pursues	only	the	goals	of	this	life	and	is	bound

by	the	suffering	of	birth,	old	age,	sickness,	and	death.

When	this	present	illusory	body	suddenly	meets	its	final	illness,

may	I	self-liberate	all	attachment	to	objects	of	matter	and	mind.

O	Master,	from	your	compassion,	bless	me.

Bless	me	that	I	may	cut	the	illusory	visions	of	the	bardo.

Bless	me	that	I	may	reconnect	the	mother	voidness	and	the	son	awareness.

Thereafter,	in	the	intermediate	state	near	death,

though	surrounded	by	loved	ones	and	relatives,

one	journeys	to	the	other	dimension	alone.

There	is	no	way	to	prolong	life	even	for	a	moment

when	the	four	elements	of	this	magical	body	dissolve.

O	Master,	from	your	compassion,	bless	me.

Bless	me	that	I	may	cut	the	illusory	visions	of	the	bardo.

Bless	me	that	I	may	reconnect	the	mother	voidness	and	the	son	awareness.

When	the	energy	of	earth	dissolves	in	the	water,

one	experiences	the	failing	collapse	of	the	body.

Visions	of	smoky	movement	and	mirage	arise.

When	the	yellow	light	that	is	one’s	own	suddenly	appears,

may	I	recognize	it	as	the	divine	body	of	Salwa	Rangyung	(self-originated	clarity).

O	Master,	from	your	compassion,	bless	me.

Bless	me	that	I	may	cut	the	illusory	visions	of	the	bardo.

Bless	me	that	I	may	reconnect	the	mother	voidness	and	the	son	awareness.

When	the	energy	of	water	dissolves	in	the	fire,

the	body	pales	and	one	is	thirsty	with	a	dry	tongue

and	there	are	visions	of	flooding	water.

When	the	purity	of	the	water	arises	as	the	blue	light,



may	I	realize	it	as	the	divine	body	of	Gawa	Dondrup	(joyful	accomplishment).

O	Master,	from	your	compassion,	bless	me.

Bless	me	that	I	may	cut	the	illusory	visions	of	the	bardo.

Bless	me	that	I	may	reconnect	the	mother	voidness	and	the	son	awareness.

When	the	energy	of	fire	dissolves	in	the	wind,

the	body	grows	cold	and	the	channels	cannot	be	sustained.

One	experiences	visions	like	fireflies.

When	the	red	light	of	one’s	self	arises,

may	I	realize	it	as	the	divinity	Chetak	Ngomed	(thing-less	and	without	division).

O	Master,	from	your	compassion,	bless	me.

Bless	me	that	I	may	cut	the	illusory	visions	of	the	bardo.

Bless	me	that	I	may	reconnect	the	mother	voidness	and	the	son	awareness.

When	the	wind	energy	dissolves	into	consciousness,

the	breath	stops,	the	eyes	roll	upward,

and	one	experiences	visions	like	the	blowing	out	of	butter	lamps.

When	the	green	self-light	arises,

may	I	realize	it	as	the	virtuous	divinity	Gelha	Garchug	(the	richness	of	dancing	activities).

O	Master,	from	your	compassion,	bless	me.

Bless	me	that	I	may	cut	the	illusory	visions	of	the	bardo.

Bless	me	that	I	may	reconnect	the	mother	voidness	and	the	son	awareness.

When	the	consciousness	dissolves	into	the	base	of	all,

internal	sense	organs	and	their	external	objects	cease.

Then	there	is	a	vision	like	the	cloudless	sky.

When	the	clear	light	bardo	arises,

may	I	realize	it	as	Kunang	Chabpa	(pervading	all	visions).

O	Master,	from	your	compassion,	bless	me.

Bless	me	that	I	may	cut	the	illusory	visions	of	the	bardo.

Bless	me	that	I	may	reconnect	the	mother	voidness	and	the	son	awareness.

When	the	six	consciousnesses	and	their	six	objects	dissolve	in	the	heart

and	the	darkness	arises	and	the	rain	of	blood	pools	in	the	lake	of	blood

and	the	great	sound	arises	and	the	great	light	arises,

may	I	realize	all	my	visions	as	illusion.

May	I	become	realized	in	the	self-arising	innate	awareness.

O	Master,	from	your	compassion,	bless	me.

Bless	me	that	I	may	cut	the	illusory	visions	of	the	bardo.

Bless	me	that	I	may	reconnect	the	mother	voidness	and	the	son	awareness.



When	consciousness	remains	as	an	orphan,	with	no	support,

and	the	vision	of	the	fearful	lord	of	death	in	the	other	dimension	arises,

and	the	delusory	visions	of	sound,	light,	and	rays	arise,

bless	me	that	I	may	liberate	in	the	intermediate	state

by	realizing	these	as	self-arising	self-energy.

O	Master,	from	your	compassion,	bless	me.

Bless	me	that	I	may	cut	the	illusory	visions	of	the	bardo.

Bless	me	that	I	may	reconnect	the	mother	voidness	and	the	son	awareness.

Bless	me	that	I	may	recognize	all	vision	as	illusion.

Bless	me	that	I	may	cut	the	possibility	of	birth	in	the	lower	realms.

Bless	me	that	I	may	realize	the	single	essence	of	the	three	times.

Bless	me	that	I	may	obtain	the	buddhahood	of	the	three	kayas.

Bless	me	that	I	may	achieve	the	five	wisdoms.

Bless	me	that	I	may	help	countless	sentient	beings.

O	Master,	from	your	compassion,	bless	me.

Bless	me	that	I	may	cut	the	illusory	visions	of	the	bardo.

Bless	me	that	I	may	reconnect	the	mother	voidness	and	the	son	awareness.

from:	Gur	zhog	chun	pos	mdzad	pa’i	smon	lam	rin	chen	phreng	ba



INTRODUCTION
	

I	 grew	 up	 strongly	 connected	 to	 the	 power	 of	 the	 natural	 world.	 The	 way	 we	 lived
required	it.	We	didn’t	have	running	water	or	electric	stoves.	We	carried	all	our	water	 in
buckets	from	the	nearby	spring,	heated	our	buildings	with	wood	fires,	and	cooked	over	an
open	 flame.	 We	 had	 a	 small	 garden	 patch	 where	 we	 grew	 vegetables—onions	 and
tomatoes—and	so	we	put	our	hands	in	the	earth.	The	summer	rains	meant	both	flooding
and	water	for	the	rest	of	the	year.	Nature	wasn’t	preserved	in	parks	or	kept	on	the	other
side	of	the	window,	and	contact	with	the	elements	wasn’t	for	pleasure,	though	there	was
pleasure	 in	 it.	There	was	a	direct	relationship	between	our	 lives	and	the	 fire,	 the	wood,
the	 water,	 and	 the	 weather.	 We	 were	 dependent	 on	 the	 raw	 elements	 of	 nature	 for
survival.

Perhaps	 that	dependence	helped	our	 culture,	 like	most	 indigenous	 cultures,	 understand
the	 natural	 world	 to	 be	 sacred	 and	 alive	 with	 beings	 and	 forces,	 visible	 and	 invisible.
During	 Losar,	 the	 Tibetan	 celebration	 of	 the	 new	 year,	we	 did	 not	 drink	 champagne	 to
celebrate.	Instead,	we	went	to	the	local	spring	to	perform	a	ritual	of	gratitude.	We	made
offerings	to	the	nagas,	the	water	spirits	who	activated	the	water	element	in	the	area.	We
made	smoke	offerings	to	the	local	spirits	associated	with	the	natural	world	around	us.

Beliefs	 and	behaviors	 like	 ours	 evolved	 long	 ago	 and	 are	 often	 seen	 as	 primitive	 in	 the
West.	But	 they	are	not	only	projections	of	human	 fears	onto	 the	natural	world,	as	some
anthropologists	and	historians	suggest.	Our	way	of	relating	to	the	elements	originated	in
the	 direct	 experiences	 by	 our	 sages	 and	 common	 people	 of	 the	 sacred	 nature	 of	 the
external	and	internal	elements.	We	call	these	elements	earth,	water,	fire,	air,	and	space.

My	purposes	in	writing	this	book	are	threefold:	to	contribute	to	a	growing	respect	for	the
natural	environment	that	must	mature	if	we	are	to	avoid	degrading	the	quality	of	human
life;	 to	make	 the	 traditional	Tibetan	world	view	available	 to	modern	Westerners;	 and	 to
show	that	understanding	the	elements	is	one	key	to	understanding	spiritual	practice.	By
knowing	the	elements	and	their	relationship	to	them,	those	who	follow	the	spiritual	path
can	know	why	they	do	the	practices	they	do,	what	practices	are	needed	and	when,	and	in
what	situations,	certain	practices	may	be	ineffective	or	even	a	hindrance.

The	teachings	in	this	book	originate	in	the	Tibetan	Bön	tradition.	The	book	is	centered	on
practices	 that	 represent	 three	 dimensions	 of	 the	 spiritual	 journey.	 These	 are	 traditional
practices	in	Tibetan	Bön	and	Buddhism	and	are	meant	to	be	applied,	not	just	understood
intellectually.	 Sometimes	 we	 think	 that	 we	 really	 know	 something	 when	 we	 have
information	about	it,	that	we	understand	anything	we	can	talk	about.	If	we	do	not	actually
do	practice,	but	only	read	about	practice,	 it’s	analogous	to	owning	medicine	and	talking
about	it	rather	than	taking	it	and	being	cured.

Most	of	 the	practices	 in	 this	book	are	supportive	practices.	They	enhance	the	quality	of
life,	promote	healing,	and	offer	some	protection	from	harm	and	illness.	They	can	keep	us
alert	 rather	 than	 dull,	 relaxed	 rather	 than	 agitated.	 They	 can	 contribute	 to	 our	 health,
vigor,	and	pleasure	in	life.	This	is	good	and	worthwhile.	However,	the	practices	are	most
importantly	 used	 to	 develop	 spiritually.	 They	 change	 our	 perspectives	 about	 our
relationships	to	the	natural	world	and	to	our	own	experiences;	they	open	and	expand	our
views.	And	they	support	our	meditation	practices.	When	the	elements	are	out	of	balance,
it’s	difficult	 to	do	meditative	practice	and	we	are	more	 likely	 to	be	 forced	 to	work	with
illness,	 agitation,	 dullness,	 or	 distraction.	 The	 practices	 presented	 here	 help	 us	 to
overcome	external	obstacles	as	well	as	disturbances	in	the	mind	and	energy	by	balancing
the	 elements	 in	 the	 dimension	 of	 the	 individual.	 When	 the	 elements	 are	 balanced,	 it’s
easier	to	abide	in	the	nature	of	mind,	in	the	buddha-nature,	which	is	the	final	method	and
goal	of	the	spiritual	journey.

The	practices	and	 the	 theory	of	 the	practices	are	presented	 together.	This	arrangement
reflects	our	tradition,	where	it	is	taught	that	how	we	see	the	world	determines	the	quality
of	our	practices	and	our	lives.

I	 have	 tried	 to	 include	practices	 that	 can	be	 done	 in	 daily	 life.	We	don’t	 need	 to	 go	 on
retreat	 to	 do	 them,	 though	 we	 can.	 We	 don’t	 need	 to	 cancel	 all	 the	 dates	 in	 our
appointment	books.	The	elements	are	all	that	exist,	so	we	can	always	do	practice	with	the
elements,	at	any	time,	wherever	we	are,	whatever	we	are	doing.



I’ve	made	the	assumption	in	this	book	that	the	reader	is	familiar	with	certain	terms.	For
example,	I	use	Dzogchen	and	its	translation	as	“Great	Perfection”	interchangeably.	I	also
use	 “innate	 awareness,”	 “non-dual	 awareness,”	 and	 “non-dual	 presence”	 as	 equivalent
translations	for	rigpa,	and	“nature	of	mind”	and	the	“natural	state”	as	synonyms	for	the
inseparability	of	emptiness	and	luminosity,	the	buddha-nature	which	is	our	true	nature.

I	have	included	quotes	from	traditional	texts.	The	translations	are	not	exact.	I	translated
them	for	meaning	rather	than	as	word-for-word	conversions.	I	have	included	references	in
the	 bibliography	 so	 that	 anyone	 interested	 can	 look	 at	 the	 Tibetan	 source	 material.
Tibetan	words	that	are	in	the	glossary	are	italicized	on	their	first	use	in	the	text.	Many	of
the	terms	used	in	this	book	are	explained	in	greater	detail	in	my	earlier	books,	Wonders	of
the	 Natural	 Mind	 and	The	 Tibetan	 Yogas	 of	 Dream	 and	 Sleep,	 both	 published	 by	 Snow
Lion	Publications.

There	 is	a	great	deal	of	 information	 in	 this	book.	When	you	 feel	 full,	 stop	reading.	Take
time	to	digest,	to	match	what	you	are	reading	to	your	experience.	This	is	how	to	make	the
teaching	part	of	your	life.

THE	BÖN	RELIGION

	

Because	so	many	people	in	the	West	are	unfamiliar	with	Bön,	I	want	to	tell	a	little	of	its
history.	As	with	 the	history	of	any	 tradition,	any	people,	any	country,	 there	are	multiple
versions	of	its	past.	The	oral	tradition	asserts	that	the	Bön	religion	began	over	seventeen
thousand	years	ago,	but	modern	scholars	believe	it	began	much	later.	In	either	case,	Bön
is	 recognized	 as	 the	 indigenous	 religion	 of	 Tibet	 and	 the	 origin	 of	many	 of	 its	 spiritual
traditions.

Yungdrung	Bön	(Eternal	Bön)	was	the	first	complete	path	of	spiritual	liberation	in	Tibet.	It
began	 with	 the	 Buddha	 Tonpa	 Shenrab,	 born	 in	 the	 Mushen	 family.	 His	 father	 was
Gyalbon	Thokar;	his	mother	was	Yoche	Gyalzhema.	They	lived	in	Tazig	‘Olmo	Lung	Ring,
thought	by	some	 to	have	been	a	 land	 to	 the	northwest	of	Tibet	and	by	others	 to	be	 the
mythical	land	of	Shambhala.

Tradition	 asserts	 that	 there	 were	 three	 “doors”	 or	 sources	 of	 Bön.	 The	 first	 was	 Tazig
‘Olmo	 Lung	 Ring.	 The	 second	 was	 in	 Central	 Asia,	 possibly	 concentrated	 in	 the	 area
where	Persia	used	to	be.	Bön	historians	believe	that	Bön	was	widespread	in	Central	Asia
before	 Islam	 came	 to	 dominate	 the	 cultures	 there	 and	 that	 many	 of	 the	 antiquities
uncovered	in	Central	Asia	and	assumed	to	be	Buddhist	are	actually	Bön.	The	third	was	the
kingdom	of	Zhang	Zhung,	which	included	a	large	part	of	what	is	now	western	Tibet.	The
teachings	began	 in	 the	 first	door,	spread	through	the	second,	and	finally	were	taught	 in
Zhang	Zhung	and	Tibet.

Legend	has	it	that	Tonpa	Shenrab	came	to	the	land	that	is	now	southern	Tibet	searching
for	horses	 stolen	by	a	demon.	He	visited	 the	sacred	mountain	Kong-po,	a	mountain	 still
circumambulated	by	Bön	pilgrims	in	the	counter-clockwise	Bön	way.	When	Tonpa	Shenrab
arrived,	he	found	a	primitive	people	whose	spiritual	practice	was	based	on	appeasement
of	spirits	through	animal	sacrifice.	He	put	an	end	to	animal	sacrifice,	teaching	the	people
to	 substitute	 animal	 forms	 made	 from	 barley	 flour	 in	 their	 offerings,	 a	 practice	 still
current	with	Tibetans	of	all	traditions.

As	is	true	for	all	buddhas,	Tonpa	Shenrab	taught	according	to	the	capacity	of	the	students.
Realizing	 that	 the	 people	 of	 Zhang	 Zhung	 were	 not	 ready	 for	 the	 higher	 teachings	 of
liberation,	he	taught	only	the	lower,	shamanic	vehicles	and	prayed	that	through	diligence,
devotion,	and	application	they	would	prepare	themselves	for	the	higher	vehicles	of	sutra,
tantra,	 and	 Dzogchen.	 And	 in	 time,	 all	 the	 teachings	 of	 Tonpa	 Shenrab	 reached	 Zhang
Zhung.

Centuries	 later,	during	 the	period	of	 the	second	Tibetan	king,	Mu	Khri	Tsenpo,	many	of
Bön’s	 tantric	and	Dzogchen	cycles	of	 teachings	were	 translated	 from	Zhang	Zhung	 into
Tibetan.	 Although	 the	 teachings	 had	 existed	 in	 Tibet	 for	 centuries	 through	 oral
transmission,	 this	 was	 the	 first	 time	 they	 had	 been	 recorded	 in	 the	 written	 Tibetan
language.	For	a	long	time	Zhang	Zhung	and	the	Zhang	Zhung	language	were	thought	by
Western	scholars	to	be	only	mythical,	but	this	view	is	being	reassessed	as	more	fragments
of	the	Zhang	Zhung	language	are	discovered.

The	first	seven	Tibetan	kings	are	supposed	to	have	died	without	leaving	physical	bodies,	a



sign	of	great	spiritual	attainment.	Some	scholars	believe	that	they	achieved	the	“body	of
light,”	 a	 sign	 of	 enlightenment	 particular	 to	 Dzogchen,	 which	 would	 suggest	 that	 the
Dzogchen	teachings	already	existed	 in	Tibet	at	 that	 time.	Buddhist	scholars	believe	that
Dzogchen	 came	 from	 India,	 and	 Bön	 in	 fact	 recognizes	 one	 tradition	 of	 Dzogchen	 as
reaching	 Tibet	 through	 India,	 though	 its	 main	 Dzogchen	 teaching	 cycles	 originated	 in
Zhang	Zhung.

The	 main	 teachings	 of	 Bön	 are	 included	 in	 The	 Nine	 Ways,	 also	 known	 as	 the	 Nine
Vehicles.	 These	 are	 nine	 categories	 of	 teachings,	 each	 category	 with	 its	 characteristic
view,	 practices,	 and	 results.	 For	 instance,	 the	 lower	 vehicles	 have	 to	 do	with	medicine,
astrology,	divination,	 and	 so	on.	Above	 them	are	 the	 teachings	of	 sutra	and	 tantra.	And
finally,	 the	highest	 vehicle	 is	 the	 teaching	of	Dzogchen,	 the	Great	Perfection.	There	are
traditionally	 three	 versions	 of	 the	 Nine	 Ways,	 known	 as	 the	 Southern,	 Central,	 and
Northern	Treasures.	The	information	on	shamanism	in	this	book	comes	primarily	from	the
Southern	 Treasure.	 The	 Central	 Treasure	 is	 very	 close	 to	 the	 Buddhist	 Nyingma
teachings.	 The	 Northern	 Treasure	 is	 lost.	 Each	 Treasure	 includes	 some	 aspects	 of	 the
sutra,	tantra,	and	Dzogchen	teachings.	In	addition,	there	are	fifteen	volumes	that	contain
the	main	biographies	of	the	Buddha	Tonpa	Shenrab.

According	to	Chinese	statistics,	Bön	is	the	second	most	populous	religious	group	in	Tibet
and	Bön-pos	 are	 found	 in	 all	 regions	 of	 Tibet.	 The	 ancient	 teachings	 are	 still	 practiced
widely	by	both	monastics	and	 lay	yogic	practitioners,	and	even	 in	 the	 twentieth	century
there	have	been	Bön	masters	who	have	attained	the	“rainbow	body.”	This	is	the	ultimate
sign	 of	 full	 realization	 in	 the	 Dzogchen	 tradition	 in	 which,	 at	 the	 time	 of	 death,	 the
practitioner	of	great	accomplishment	releases	the	five	gross	elements	that	constitute	the
body.	He	or	she	dissolves	them	in	their	essence,	which	is	the	pure	elemental	light.	During
the	process,	 the	substantiality	of	 the	body	dissipates	 in	a	display	of	multi-colored	 lights,
which	is	why	this	is	known	as	the	rainbow	body.	Sometimes	no	corpse	remains	or	only	the
hair	and	nails	are	left,	but	in	any	case	the	appearance	of	the	rainbow	body	is	the	sign	that
the	 practitioner	 has	 attained	 the	 highest	 level	 of	 realization	 and	 is	 no	 longer	 bound	 by
dualisms	of	matter	and	mind	or	life	and	death.

After	 the	 Chinese	 takeover	 of	 Tibet,	 a	 rigorous	 training	 program	 for	 Bön	 monks	 was
started	at	Menri	Monastery	in	Dolanji,	H.P.,	India	and	at	Tristsen	Norbutse	monastery	in
Kathmandu,	 Nepal.	 This	 was	 accomplished	 through	 the	 hard	 work	 of	 H.	 H.	 Lungtok
Tenpa’i	 Nyima	 Rinpoche,	 Lopon	 Tenzin	 Namdak	 Rinpoche,	 and	 the	 elder	 monks.	 The
educational	program	leads	to	the	Geshe	degree.	The	first	class	outside	of	Tibet,	of	which	I
was	a	member,	graduated	in	1986.

Many	of	the	Bön	traditions,	along	with	many	of	the	Tibetan	Buddhist	traditions,	have	been
lost	 under	 the	 current	 political	 rule	 of	 the	 Chinese	 in	 Tibet.	Many	 other	 traditions	 are
threatened.	However,	both	Tibetan	Bön	and	Buddhism	are	taking	root	in	India	and	Nepal
and	are	now	spreading	throughout	the	world.

As	some	readers	may	know,	there	are	many	misconceptions	about	the	Bön	religion,	even
among	 Tibetan	 Buddhists.	 Bön	 suffered	 the	 fate	 of	 many	 indigenous	 religions,	 a	 fate
similar	 to	 that	 of	 the	 religions	 of	 Europe	 and	 the	 Americas	 when	 Christianity	 was
introduced.	 When	 a	 new	 religion	 spreads	 in	 a	 culture,	 it	 often	 supports	 its	 growth	 by
describing	 the	 native	 religion	 in	 negative	 terms,	 as	 something	 to	 be	 overcome	 and
rejected.

I	have	noticed	that	many	Tibetans,	even	high	lamas	who	have	no	familiarity	with	the	Bön
tradition	or	 literature,	 readily	pass	on	uninformed	negative	 judgements	about	Bön.	 I	do
not	understand	this	attitude.	Of	course	such	prejudice	is	not	only	directed	towards	Bön—
prejudice	 exists	 between	 the	 schools	 of	 Tibetan	 Buddhism,	 too.	 I	 add	 this	 note	 for	 all
students	of	Bön	so	that	they	will	know	about	this	sad	prejudice	before	they	encounter	it.	I
hope	 that	 as	Tibetan	 forms	of	 spirituality	move	 from	Tibet	 to	 the	 rest	 of	 the	world,	 the
narrow-mindedness	of	prejudice	can	be	left	behind.

Happily,	there	are	many	Buddhist	Tibetans,	laymen	and	monks,	ordinary	householders	and
high	 lamas,	who	are	heirs	 to	 the	non-sectarian	movement	that	 flourished	 in	Tibet	 in	 the
nineteenth	century.	Most	outstanding	of	 the	Tibetan	voices	speaking	today	 for	 tolerance
and	understanding	is	that	of	His	Holiness,	the	Fourteenth	Dalai	Lama,	who	has	formally
recognized	Bön	as	one	of	the	five	major	spiritual	traditions	of	Tibet.	On	many	occasions	he
has	 offered	 encouragement	 and	 support	 to	H.	H.	 Lungtok	 Tenpa’i	Nyima	Rinpoche	 and
Lopon	 Tenzin	 Namdak	 Rinpoche,	 asking	 that	 they	 work	 to	 preserve	 the	 ancient	 Bön
heritage	as	a	treasure	for	all	Tibetans.



People	 in	 the	West	are	adopting	an	open	attitude	 to	Bön	as	 they	 learn	more	of	 it.	 In	 its
texts	 and	 traditions	 they	 find	a	balance	of	 study	and	practice,	 faith	 and	 critical	 inquiry.
They	 also	 find	 that	 Bön,	 rooted	 in	 times	 prior	 to	 recorded	 history,	 has	 fully	 developed
traditions	of	 shamanism,	philosophy	and	debate,	monasticism,	 tantric	 transmissions	and
yogas,	and	the	highest	teachings	of	the	Great	Perfection.	Although	this	book	is	primarily
for	 practitioners,	 I	 hope	 that	 scholars	 will	 get	 a	 sense	 of	 the	 depth	 and	 variety	 of	 the
spiritual	traditions	of	Bön.

The	 practices	 of	 the	 spiritual	 path,	 if	 done	with	 correct	 understanding	 and	 application,
bring	 results.	 Results	 develop	 faith.	 When	 faith	 is	 strong	 and	 based	 on	 certainty,	 it
furthers	 practice.	 Faith	 and	 practice	 together	 lead	 to	 wisdom	 and	 happiness.	 It	 is	 my
sincere	wish	that	this	book	contribute	to	the	well-being	and	spiritual	progress	of	all	who
read	it.



ONE

	THE	ELEMENTS
In	Tibetan	culture,	the	five	elements—earth,	water,	fire,	air,	and	space—are	considered	to
be	 the	 substance	of	 all	 things	 and	processes.	 The	 study	 of	 their	 interactions	permeates
Tibetan	thought.	An	understanding	of	the	elements	forms	the	basis	of	medicine,	astrology,
the	 calendar,	 and	 psychology,	 and	 it	 underlies	 the	 spiritual	 traditions	 of	 shamanism,
tantra,	and	Dzogchen.

The	names	of	the	elements	are	symbolic.	They	suggest	a	description	of	particular	qualities
and	modes	of	action	by	analogy	to	the	familiar	elements	of	the	natural	environment.	As	in
most	cultures,	the	Tibetan	tradition	uses	the	natural	elements	as	fundamental	metaphors
to	 describe	 forces	 both	 internal	 and	 external.	 For	 example,	 physical	 properties	 are
assigned	 to	 the	elements:	 earth	 is	 solidity;	water	 is	 cohesion;	 fire	 is	 temperature;	 air	 is
motion;	 and	 space	 is	 the	 spatial	 dimension	 that	 accommodates	 the	 other	 four	 active
elements.	 In	addition,	 the	elements	are	correlated	 to	different	emotions,	 temperaments,
directions,	 colors,	 tastes,	 body	 types,	 illnesses,	 thinking	 styles,	 and	 character.	From	 the
five	 elements	 arise	 the	 five	 senses	 and	 the	 five	 fields	 of	 sensual	 experience;	 the	 five
negative	emotions	and	the	five	wisdoms;	and	the	five	extensions	of	the	body.	They	are	the
five	primary	pranas	or	vital	energies.	They	are	the	constituents	of	every	physical,	sensual,
mental,	and	spiritual	phenomenon.

The	metaphoric	use	of	the	elements	is	also	common	in	Western	languages:	a	person	can
be	earthy	or	spacy,	fluid	or	fiery.	Anger	is	hot,	sadness	is	watery.	Attitudes	can	be	airy	or
grounded.

But	in	the	Tibetan	traditions	the	elements	are	not	only	understood	metaphorically.	Rather,
the	 elements	 in	 nature	 concretely	 represent	 a	 subtler	 and	 more	 fundamental
discrimination	of	 five	aspects	 of	 the	primordial	 energy	of	 existence.	There	 is	nothing	 in
any	 dimension	 that	 is	 not	 composed	 wholly	 of	 the	 interactions	 of	 these	 five	 aspects	 of
energy.	The	elemental	processes	create	the	universe,	sustain	it,	and	ultimately	destroy	it.
This	is	also	true	for	individual	beings:	at	birth	the	play	of	the	elements	creates	the	body,
mind,	and	personality.	At	death	these	dissolve	as	the	elements	collapse	into	one	another.
And	during	the	whole	of	life,	the	individual’s	relationship	to	the	elements	determines	the
quality	of	experience.

There	 is	 little	 benefit	 in	 the	 idea	 of	 the	 elements	 if	 it	 remains	 an	 abstraction,	 a	way	 to
divide	everything	 into	 five.	An	understanding	of	 the	elements	becomes	useful	when	 it	 is
related	to	experience	and	then	used	positively	to	affect	the	quality	of	our	lives.	But	before
we	can	apply	our	understanding,	we	 first	need	to	become	familiar	with	 the	elements	by
initially	relating	to	them	through	images	and	metaphors.

Our	 human	 bodies	 have	 evolved	 over	 hundreds	 of	 thousands	 of	 years	 through	 their
relationships	 to	 the	 physical	 environment.	 That	 history	 is	 evident	 in	 the	 satisfaction	we
experience	in	natural	beauty;	interaction	with	the	natural	elements	can	heal	and	refresh.
We	enjoy	the	clean	earth	of	the	desert	and	the	rich	soil	of	the	garden.	We	go	for	vacations
to	 ocean,	 river,	 or	 lake.	We	 relax	 in	 a	 bath.	We	 are	 entranced	 by	 flame	 and	 enjoy	 the
warmth	of	the	sun	or	the	fire	in	a	fireplace.	We	take	a	deep	breath	to	calm	ourselves,	sigh
to	release	sadness,	visit	the	mountains	to	be	invigorated	by	the	pure	air.	And	the	sky,	the
external	 image	 of	 space,	 fascinates	 us—the	 color	 and	 the	 weather	 in	 it,	 the	 light	 that
pervades	 it.	We	relax	 in	wide,	open	spaces	and	feel	secure	 in	close,	comfortable	spaces.
Or	 we	 feel	 anxious	 in	 large	 spaces	 and	 claustrophobic	 in	 closed	 spaces.	 One	 way	 or
another	we	react.

When	deprived	of	one	of	 the	elements,	we	yearn	 for	 it.	 In	a	desert,	we	are	 joyful	when
encountering	water.	After	being	at	sea	for	a	long	time,	we	want	to	kiss	the	earth	when	we
land.	When	cold,	we	run	toward	fire.	The	five	raw	elements	affect	us	profoundly	on	a	deep
and	 instinctive	 level,	 but	 we	 usually	 get	 lost	 in	 the	 surface	 of	 these	 experiences,	 not
realizing	that	experience	with	the	elements	can	connect	us	to	the	sacred	and	can	lead	to
healing,	balance,	and	a	deeper	understanding	of	ourselves.

Five	elements	may	seem	too	few	to	account	for	all	the	diversity	in	things	and	beings,	but
the	 five	 elements	 are	 five	 discriminations	 that	 continually	 branch	 into	 more	 subtle
divisions.



This	 understanding	 can	 be	 applied	 to	 the	 body,	 for	 example.	 There	 are	 five	 major
appendages	to	the	torso:	two	legs,	two	arms,	and	a	head.	Each	of	these	then	branch	into	a
further	five:	the	arms	and	legs	into	five	fingers	and	five	toes,	the	head	into	the	five	sense
organs.

One	traditional	formulation	describes	the	flesh	as	earth;	the	blood	and	other	bodily	fluids
as	 water;	 the	 electrical	 and	 chemical	 energies	 and	meta-bolic	 heat	 as	 fire;	 the	 breath,
oxygen,	 and	other	gases	 as	 air;	 and	 the	 space	 the	body	occupies	 and	 the	 spaces	 in	 the
body,	 as	 well	 as	 the	 consciousness,	 as	 the	 space	 element.	 Each	 of	 these	 five	 could	 be
further	analyzed	in	terms	of	the	elements:	in	the	flesh	alone	can	be	found	solidity	(earth),
cohesion	(water),	temperature	(fire),	motility	(air),	and	awareness	(space).	These	divisions
can	 also	 be	 applied	 to	 blood:	 its	 solids,	 fluidity,	 temperature,	movement,	 space.	 And	 of
course	each	of	the	subdivisions	can	be	applied	to	further	fivefold	analysis	until,	ultimately,
anything	can	be	reduced	to	the	essential	five	elemental	energies.

The	interactions	of	the	five	elements	give	rise	not	only	to	parts	of	the	system,	to	individual
bodies	and	planets	and	computer	software	and	trees,	but	also	to	all	realms	of	existence	in
every	dimension.	The	dynamism	of	the	five	elements	lies	under	the	complexities	of	all	that
exists.

THREE	LEVELS	OF	SPIRITUAL	PRACTICE

The	 use	 of	 elements	 	 in	 spiritual	 practice	 varies	 according	 to	 whether	 the	 approach	 is
through	shamanism,	tantra,	or	Dzogchen;	that	is,	the	external,	internal,	or	secret	levels.

External

Externally,	 the	 elements	 are	 not	 only	 the	 raw	 	 elements	 of	 our	 sensual	 experience—the
earth	we	live	on,	the	water	we	drink,	the	fire	that	warms	us,	the	air	we	breathe,	and	the
space	 through	 which	 we	 move—they	 are	 also	 the	 spirits	 connected	 with	 the	 elements.
These	include	goddesses,	elemental	spirits,	and	other	beings.	Working	with	these	beings
is	a	common	practice	in	Tibetan	culture	and	is	the	domain	of	what	I’m	calling	shamanism,
though	I	want	to	be	clear	that	there	is	no	word	like	“shamanism”	in	the	Tibetan	language.

Tibetan	traditions	of	working	with	spirits	originated	in	Bön	but	are	now	found	throughout
Tibetan	culture.	Many	decisions	made	by	Tibetan	officials	and	high	lamas	of	monasteries
of	all	sects	are	made	partially	through	consulting	human	oracles	and	non-physical	beings.
Tibetans	do	not	like	to	think	of	this	practice	as	shamanism	because	for	some	Tibetans	the
word	 is	 related	 to	 animal	 sacrifice	 or	 to	 a	 more	 primitive	 spirituality.	 What	 I	 am
addressing	here	has	nothing	to	do	with	such	things.	Rather,	these	are	practices	taught	in
the	 first	 four	 of	 the	 nine	 levels	 of	 spiritual	 teachings	 of	 the	 Southern	 Treasury	 of	 Bön
teachings.

Internal

The	internal	elements	are	the	elemental	energies	rather	t	han	their	 forms.	In	our	bodies
these	 are	 the	 physical	 energies	 that	 pump	 our	 blood,	 digest	 our	 food,	 and	 fire	 our
neurons,	 and	 also	 the	 more	 subtle	 energies	 upon	 which	 our	 health	 and	 capacities	 are
based	and	depend.	Some	of	these	subtle	energies	are	now	recognized	and	studied	in	the
West	through	a	new	familiarity	with	the	Eastern	medical	models	that	inform	acupuncture
and	 the	 new	 uses	 Western	 medical	 researchers	 are	 finding	 for	 different	 vibratory
treatments.	 There	 are	 also	 much	 subtler	 energies	 that	 cannot	 be	 detected	 by	 physical
measurement	but	that	are	available	to	direct	experience	through	yogic	and	contemplative
disciplines.	This	subtler	level	of	elemental	energy	not	only	is	found	inside	the	body	but	is
also	 the	 dimension	 of	 energy	 that	 skilled	 practitioners	 of	 feng	 shui—the	Chinese	 art	 of
appropriate	placement	of	objects—sense	in	the	environment.	These	are	also	the	energies
that	 build	 in	 group	 phenomena	 like	 crowd	 behavior	 and	 patriotism	 and	 so	 on.	 Tantra
works	with	these	energies	by	guiding	them	in	the	body	for	specific	purposes	using	direct
yogic	 means	 involving	 physical	 posture,	 breathing,	 visualization,	 and	 mantra.	 Tantra
recognizes	the	energies	as	divine	forces.

Secret

The	 secret	 dimension	 of	 the	 elements	 exists	 beyond	 duality	 and	 	 is	 therefore	 hard	 to
describe	with	 language,	which	necessarily	divides	experience	 into	separate	objects.	This
most	 subtle	 dimension	 of	 the	 elements	 is	 the	 radiance	 of	 being,	 the	 “five	 pure	 lights,”
aspects	 of	 the	 luminosity	 that,	 inseparably	 united	 with	 emptiness,	 is	 the	 basis	 of
everything.	 The	 practices	 and	 teachings	 associated	 with	 this	 level	 of	 the	 elements	 are



from	Dzogchen,	the	Great	Perfection.

These	 three	 dimensions	 are	 separated	 only	 conceptually.	 This	 is	 an	 important	 point	 to
keep	in	mind	when	reading	this	book.	It	is	a	mistake	to	think	that	external,	internal,	and
secret	can	truly	be	divided,	or	that	external	practice,	tantra,	and	Dzogchen	are	mutually
exclusive.	Confusion	on	this	point	leads	to	many	of	the	great	divisions	in	belief:	religions
that	disregard	or	mistrust	the	life	of	the	body,	secular	cultures	that	do	not	recognize	the
sacred	 nature	 of	 the	 earth,	 or	 preoccupation	 with	 material	 well-being	 that	 ignores
spiritual	development.	All	of	life	is	important	and	arises	from	the	sacred	elements.

The	view	of	Dzogchen	is	ultimate	and	contains	the	others,	but	this	doesn’t	mean	that	the
lower	views	should	be	neglected.	Believing	 that	everything	 is	 insubstantial	 luminosity	 is
very	different	from	being	able	to	walk	through	walls.	The	highest	practice	is	the	one	that
is	most	effective,	not	necessarily	the	one	categorized	as	“higher.”

RELATING	TO	THE	SACRED

In	 shamanism,	 tantra,	 and	 Dzogchen,	 the	 elements	 are	 cons	 idered	 to	 be	 sacred,	 the
underlying	 forces	of	 existence.	Because	 they	are	 sacred,	 all	 that	 arises	 from	 them—and
that	 is	everything—is	also	sacred.	External	nature	 is	sacred	and	the	body	is	sacred.	The
elements	without	and	within	arise	together,	from	the	same	source.	The	warmth	of	the	sun
and	the	warmth	of	the	heart	are	different	in	degree,	not	in	kind.	The	water	of	the	oceans
is	not	different	from	the	water	of	our	bodies.	Our	flesh	is	formed	from	the	elements	of	the
earth	and	it	will	dissolve	back	into	the	earth.	The	air	in	our	lungs	is	the	same	air	the	hawk
rides.	The	space	in	which	the	universe	arises,	the	space	our	living	room	couch	occupies,
and	the	space	in	which	our	thoughts	arise	is	the	same	space	and	is	sacred.	And	all	that	is
in	space—substantial	and	insubstantial,	matter	and	mind—is	the	elements.

As	the	elements	in	the	body	are	sacred,	the	consciousnesses	that	arise	from	them	are	also
sacred.	 Whether	 of	 wisdom	 or	 passion,	 dream	 or	 nightmare,	 the	 living	 experience	 of
beings	 is	 a	 display	 of	 the	 pure	 elements	 interacting	 with	 awareness.	 The	 innate
awareness,	too,	is	integrated	with	the	elements.	It	 is	the	purest	and	most	subtle	level	of
the	 five	 elements	 in	 perfect	 balance,	 the	 quintessence	 of	 the	 luminosity	 of	 the	 base	 of
existence.

Sometime	 in	 the	history	of	 the	West,	 the	sense	of	sacred	relationship	was	 lost	 for	many
people.	 We	 can	 witness	 sacred	 relationships,	 or	 read	 about	 them,	 in	 the	 shaman’s
relationship	to	the	natural	world	or	in	the	tantric	practitioner’s	relationship	to	the	deities,
but	often	we	don’t	have	such	a	relationship	in	our	own	lives.

Ask	 yourself	 what	 “sacred”	 means	 to	 you.	 Are	 you	 in	 any	 relationship	 you	 regard	 as
sacred?	If	so,	 is	 it	based	in	your	own	sense	of	the	sacred	or	 is	 it	composed	of	behaviors
you	learned	from	others?	What	in	your	life	do	you	truly	believe	to	be	sacred?

Without	a	sense	of	the	sacred,	it	is	difficult	to	have	faith	in	religious	instruction.	In	Tibet	it
is	said	that	if	one	treats	one’s	master	like	a	dog,	the	teachings	are	as	worthless	as	rotten
food.	If	one	treats	one’s	master	like	a	friend,	the	teachings	nourish	like	fresh	food.	If	one
treats	one’s	teacher	like	a	deity,	the	teachings	are	divine	nectar.	Similarly,	if	we	relate	to
the	natural	world	as	a	collection	of	lifeless	mechanical	processes,	it	is	lifeless	for	us.	If	we
relate	 to	 our	bodies	 as	machines,	 they	are	machines	 to	us.	 If	we	 relate	 to	 religion	as	 a
fantasy,	it	is	a	fantasy	to	us.	But	if	we	relate	to	the	natural	world	as	alive,	full	of	spirits	and
elemental	beings,	the	natural	world	speaks	to	us.	If,	as	in	tantra,	the	body	is	regarded	as	a
divine	 palace	 and	 the	 result	 of	 great	 good	 fortune,	 as	 the	 best	 possible	 vehicle	 for
reaching	enlightenment,	it	becomes	a	vehicle	that	can	carry	us	beyond	death.	If	we	relate
to	the	dharma,	the	spiritual	teachings,	as	to	sacred	teachings	that	will	lead	us	on	the	path
to	 truth,	 the	 dharma	 in	 fact	 leads	 us	 to	 truth.	 Relating	 to	 the	 elements—to	 the	 natural
world	 and	 our	 bodies	 and	 minds—as	 sacred,	 they	 become	 sacred.	 This	 is	 not	 just	 a
psychological	trick.	It’s	a	recognition	of	our	real	situation.

Sacred	relationships	are	defined	not	only	in	terms	of	how	we	relate	to	what	is	outside	of
us.	 Relating	 to	 the	 sacred	 also	 brings	 us	 to	 the	 deepest	 sense	 of	 ourselves,	 to	 what	 is
sacred	in	us.	Shamans	connected	to	earth	find	in	themselves	the	connection	to	all	life,	to
the	powers	and	 forces	 that	control	 the	world.	Tantric	practitioners	 find	 that	devotion	 to
the	deities	leads	to	the	recognition	that	their	deeper	selves	are	the	deities.	In	guru	yoga,
the	student	must	find	the	mind	of	the	master	within.	Sacred	relationship	finds	something
sacred	outside,	but	that	which	recognizes	the	sacred	is	the	sacred	inside.

We	 are	 in	 relationship	 with	 everything.	 That’s	 what	 this	 life	 is—relationship	 with



everything.	We	may	have	many	friendly	relationships	that	are	nurturing	and	helpful,	and
that	 is	good.	Those	relationships	support	us	and	 fulfill	us	as	humans.	But	 if	we	have	no
sacred	relationship	to	the	environment,	to	people,	to	religious	images,	to	mantras,	and	so
on,	it	means	the	sacred	aspect	of	our	lives	is	dying,	or	buried,	or	hasn’t	been	accessed.	It
hasn’t	been	enriched	or	expressed.	It	doesn’t	arise	in	our	internal	experience	because	it
hasn’t	 found	a	match	 in	 the	external	world;	 there	 is	nothing	 to	evoke	 it	or	 fuel	 it.	So	 it
disappears	 from	 our	 lives	 and	 our	 cultures	 or	 becomes	 an	 abstraction	 or	 is	 reduced	 to
mythology	or	psychology.

It’s	easy	to	lose	the	sense	of	the	sacred	in	the	modern	world.	Many	of	us	live	out	of	touch
with	the	power	of	the	natural	world,	knowing	it	as	something	fenced	in	parks	and	tamed
in	gardens.	Behind	 the	 reflected	 light	 of	 the	 city,	 night	 is	 no	 longer	dark	 and	 vast.	Our
houses	 are	 temperature-controlled.	Many	 of	 us	 have	 lost	 faith	 in	 religion	 and	 live	 in	 a
world	in	which	life	has	been	reduced	to	a	chemical	reaction,	the	stars	are	dead	material
processes,	and	there	is	no	life	after	the	death	of	the	body.	The	societies	of	the	West	have
created	wonderful	technologies,	arts,	and	sciences,	but	living	in	a	dead	world,	relying	on
entertainment	 for	 fleeting	 satisfaction,	 is	 a	 sad	 and	 unnecessary	 price	 to	 pay	 for	 those
advances.

The	lack	of	relationship	to	the	sacred	can	be	an	obstruction	on	the	spiritual	path.	We	learn
something—let’s	say	the	physical	practices	 in	this	book—and	we	feel	better.	So	we	treat
them	simply	as	something	that	makes	us	feel	good,	like	going	for	a	walk	or	taking	a	bike
ride.

We	may	interpret	the	shamanic	practices	as	only	symbols	used	to	manipulate	mechanical
psychological	processes.	But	when	we	really	need	help,	we	don’t	turn	to	what	we	believe
is	 only	 psychological;	 this	 is	 because	 it	 seems	 smaller	 than	we	 are	 in	 our	 totality.	 In	 a
sacred	 relationship—to	 the	 elements,	 the	deities,	 the	master,	 the	holy	 texts—we	 turn	 to
something	bigger	than	ourselves,	bigger	than	our	problems.	We	turn	to	something	sacred,
of	 greater	 value	 and	 meaning	 than	 our	 depression	 or	 anxiety	 or	 self-hatred	 or
disappointment.

If	we	spend	a	lot	of	time	in	relationships	characterized	by	mistrust,	anger,	disrespect,	and
so	on,	every	part	of	our	lives	is	affected.	We	see	things	in	a	more	negative	light.	When	we
spend	 a	 lot	 of	 time	 in	 sacred	 relationships,	 our	 life	 is	 affected	 positively.	 Our	 painful
feelings	are	not	so	large.	We	start	to	see	the	sacred	core	of	every	being.

Developing	faith	and	gratitude	opens	the	door	to	sacred	relationships.	It’s	good	to	reflect
on	the	long	lineage	of	the	teachings,	the	men	and	women	who	followed	the	path	over	the
centuries.	They	 traveled	 far	on	 the	path	because	 they	recognized	 it	as	a	sacred	 journey
into	the	center	of	themselves	and	the	world.	And	now	it	 is	our	turn.	We	are	fortunate	to
have	an	inclination	to	lead	the	spiritual	life	and	to	have	found	appropriate	teachings	from
a	 living	 tradition.	 Opening	 our	 hearts	 and	 minds	 to	 the	 teachings,	 we	 start	 to	 open
ourselves	in	many	dimensions.	We	open	ourselves	to	sacred	energies	and	are	healed	and
blessed	 by	 them.	 Our	 well-being	 becomes	 independent	 of	 external	 circumstances.	 The
world	becomes	larger	and	all	of	it	recognized	as	alive.	There	is	no	longer	the	dead	matter
universe	of	 the	nihilists	or	 the	 impure	material	world	of	 the	dualists.	We	connect	 to	 the
sacred,	creative	energies	whose	display	is	existence	itself.

How	can	we	develop	 the	 sense	of	 the	 sacred?	By	 remembering	 that	 the	 source	of	all	 is
sacred,	 that	 space	 and	 light	 are	 sacred.	Every	 appearance	 is	 beautiful	 if	we	 go	 beyond
prejudice	 and	 recognize	 the	 vibrant,	 radiant	 nature	 of	 phenomena.	 Remember	 that	 all
beings	 have	 the	 buddha-nature.	 Remember	 the	 sacredness	 of	 the	 religious	 tradition.
Spend	time	in	nature,	particularly	places	special	to	you,	and	open	yourself	to	the	beauty	of
the	natural	world.	Begin	each	practice	period	with	prayer	and	open	your	heart.	End	each
practice	period	by	dedicating	yourself	to	the	benefit	of	all	beings.	Engage	in	the	practice
as	a	way	to	help	alleviate	the	suffering	of	all	those	you	care	about.	Spiritual	practice	is	an
activity	meant	to	benefit	all;	 it	 is	not	only	for	yourself.	Look	into	the	night	sky	when	the
stars	can	be	seen,	feel	the	immensity	and	magnificence	of	the	universe.	Think	about	the
complexity	 of	 your	 own	 body,	 the	 mysterious	 functions	 that	 support	 your	 existence.
Broaden	 your	 mind	 enough	 and	 you	 necessarily	 come	 to	 mysteries	 that	 are	 so	 much
bigger	than	everyday	concerns	that	to	encounter	them	is	to	experience	awe,	to	experience
the	sacred.

When	working	with	the	elements,	we	are	working	with	the	ground	of	the	experience	and
the	 experiencer.	 To	 recognize	 the	 elements	 in	 the	 natural	 world,	 their	 beauty	 and
interplay,	 to	 enter	 the	 sacred	 dance	 of	 the	 elements,	 is	 to	 inhabit	 a	 living	world	 full	 of



mystery	and	potential.

THE	FIVE	PURE	LIGHTS

The	most	subtle	dimension	of	the	five	elements	is	known	as	the	“five	pure	lights.”	In	the
Dzogchen	 tradition	 there	 ar	 e	 many	 texts	 of	 teachings	 about	 the	 elements.	 From	 the
Zhang	Zhung	Nyan	Gyud,	the	primary	cycle	of	Dzogchen	teachings	in	the	Bön	tradition,	I
am	drawing	from	two	main	texts	which	go	into	detail	about	the	five	lights.	These	are	The
Six	 Lamps	 (Sgronma	 drug)	 and	 The	 Mirror	 of	 the	 Luminous	 Mind	 (‘Od-gsal	 sems-kyi
melong).	 One	 teaching,	which	 is	 partially	 a	 story,	 explains	 how	 the	 elemental	 energies,
though	always	pure	in	themselves,	come	to	be	perceived	as	substantial.	It	is	also	the	story
of	 how,	 in	 the	 intermediate	 state	 (bardo)	 between	 death	 and	 birth,	 the	 individual	 goes
toward	either	the	delusions	of	samsara	or	the	freedom	of	nirvana.	On	another	level,	 it	 is
the	description	of	what	can	be	done,	in	any	moment,	to	end	ensnarement	in	karmic	visions
and	remain	in	the	natural	state	of	mind.	The	teaching	says	something	like	this:

For	each	of	us,	everything	begins	with	the	primordial	space,	the	Great	Mother	from	which
all	things	arise,	in	which	all	things	exist,	and	into	which	all	things	dissolve.	In	this	space
there	 is	movement.	What	causes	 it,	no	one	knows.	The	teachings	only	say	“the	winds	of
karma	moved.”	This	is	the	movement	of	the	subtlest	level	of	lung	or	prana,	the	energy	that
pervades	 infinite	 space	without	 characteristics	 or	 divisions.	 Inseparably	 united	with	 the
flow	of	prana	is	the	flow	of	primordial	awareness,	pure	and	without	identity.	In	this	pure
awareness	five	lights	arise.

The	 five	 lights	 are	 aspects	 of	 primordial	 luminosity.	 These	 are	 the	 five	 pure	 lights,	 the
most	subtle	level	of	the	elements.	We	talk	about	the	light	and	color	of	the	five	pure	lights
but	 this	 is	 symbolic.	The	 five	pure	 lights	are	more	subtle	 than	visible	 light,	more	subtle
than	anything	perceived	by	the	eye,	more	subtle	than	any	energy	measured	or	perceived
by	any	means.	They	are	the	energies	from	which	all	other	energies,	including	visible	light,
arise.

The	white	or	colorless	 light	 is	space,	the	green	 light	 is	air,	 the	red	 light	 is	 fire,	 the	blue
light	is	water,	and	the	yellow	light	is	earth.	These	are	the	five	aspects	of	pure	luminosity,
the	rainbow-like	energies	of	the	single	sphere	of	existence	(tigle	nyag	chik).

If	 the	 five	 lights	 are	 experienced	 dualistically,	 as	 objects	 of	 a	 perceiving	 subject,	 they
appear	 to	grow	more	 substantial.	The	 five	 lights	don’t	become	grosser,	but	 through	 the
distortions	 of	 dualistic	 vision	 the	 individual	 perceives	 them	 as	 grosser.	 As	 the	 elements
seem	to	grow	toward	greater	substantiality,	 they	are	 further	discriminated,	and	through
their	 interactions	 they	 manifest	 all	 phenomena,	 including	 the	 subject	 and	 objects	 that
make	up	all	dualistic	experience.

Eventually	 the	 five	 lights	 become	 the	 raw,	 natural	 physical	 elements	 and	 five	 inclusive
categories	of	qualities	belonging	to	external	reality.	They	become	the	different	dimensions
of	 existence	 that	 are	 various	 realms	 in	 which	 beings	 with	 and	 without	 form	 exist.
Internally	 the	 five	 lights	 seem	 to	 thicken	and	 form	 the	organs,	 the	 five	branches	of	 the
body,	the	five	fingers	of	each	hand,	the	five	toes	of	each	foot,	the	five	senses,	and	the	five
sense	fields.	The	five	 lights	become	the	five	negative	emotions	 if	we	remain	deluded,	or
the	five	wisdoms	and	the	five	buddha	families	if	we	recognize	their	purity.

This	is	not	a	story	about	a	creation	that	happened	in	the	distant	past.	It	is	about	how	we
live	 as	 individual	 beings	 and	 about	 ignorance	 and	 enlightenment.	 If	 the	 five	 lights	 are
recognized	as	a	non-dual,	unceasing	manifestation	of	the	pure	basis	of	existence	(kunzhi),
nirvana	begins.	If	the	five	lights	are	perceived	dualistically	and	thought	to	exist	externally,
as	 objects	 of	 a	 subject,	 samsara	 begins.	 The	 awareness	 does	 not	 become	 delusory	 or
become	enlightened—it	remains	non-dual	and	pure—but	the	qualities	that	arise	in	it	can
be	 either	 positive	 or	 negative.	 If	 the	 awareness	 integrates	 and	 identifies	with	 the	 pure
qualities,	a	buddha	arises	 from	the	base;	 if	with	 the	 impure,	a	samsaric	being	arises.	 In
this	moment,	right	now,	the	process	is	ongoing.

Depending	on	whether	we	 integrate	our	 immediate	experience	with	non-dual	awareness
or	cling	to	the	false	separation	of	our	selves	as	subjects	experiencing	external	objects	and
entities,	we	will	be	in	the	non-dual	natural	state	or	in	the	deluded	mind.

The	story	of	the	five	lights	can	teach	us	how	to	work	with	experience.	What	manifests	in
experience	usually	begins	on	subtle	levels	and	moves	to	grosser	ones.	This	is	true	for	any
process	that	leads	to	new	things	or	new	entities,	whether	it’s	the	birth	of	an	idea	or	the
birth	of	a	planet.	The	physical	body	of	an	 individual	begins	 in	desire	 that	 results	 in	 sex



that	brings	two	tiny	cells	together	that	develop	into	the	full	human	body.	Language	begins
with	 pure	 sound	 and	 leads	 to	meaning	 and	 all	 the	 philosophies	 and	 poetry	 of	 humans.
Physicists	 tell	 us	 that	 the	 universe	 is	 born	 from	 energy	 condensed	 in	 a	 dimensionless
point,	 and	 a	 process	 of	 increasingly	 complex	 structures	 arise	 as	 stars,	 planets,	 and
organisms.	 Problems	 often	 begin	 from	 a	 misunderstanding	 such	 as	 a	 difference	 in
religious	or	political	ideas	and	result	in	arguments,	life-long	animosities,	and	even	wars.

Karmic	dispositions	and	conditioning	determine	the	nature	of	the	world	we	inhabit:	What
we	experience	 externally	 is	 a	 projection	 of	what	 is	 internal.	 This	world	 is	 hell	 for	 some
people,	for	others	it	is	heaven.

Bön	 and	 Buddhist	 philosophy	 tell	 us	 that—beyond	 all	 these	 differences—all	 things	 and
beings	 are	 empty	 of	 inherent	 existence	 and	 are	 finally	 entirely	 insubstantial.	 Modern
physics	agrees	that	matter	is	made	of	energy	and	space.

We	 can	 say	 that	 everything	 is	 insubstantial	 or	 empty,	 but	 of	 course,	 in	 our	 experience
things	are	substantial	and	separate.	Stand	in	front	of	an	oncoming	truck	insisting	that	it	is
an	 insubstantial	 phenomenon	 and	 you’ll	 be	 run	 over.	 But	we	must	 begin	 to	 change	 our
minds	about	the	condition	of	phenomena.	When	we	continue	to	react	to	experience	as	if	it
is	made	of	solid	things	and	discrete	substantial	entities,	the	continuation	of	the	ordinary
world	is	assured.	This	is	not	just	abstract	philosophy.	If	we	react	to	our	problems	as	if	they
are	real	and	solid,	they	are	so,	in	our	experience.	But	if	we	recognize	them	to	be	fleeting
and	mirage-like,	 a	 display	 of	 the	 sacred	 elemental	 energies	 in	 vast	 space,	 they	 are	 no
longer	problems.

Because	 the	story	of	 the	 five	pure	 lights	 is	not	 the	story	 that	 science	 tells	us,	 it	 can	be
mistaken	for	fantasy,	for	something	not	true—by	which	is	usually	meant	that	it	is	not	fact.
The	five	pure	lights	can’t	be	measured	or	weighed;	they	aren’t	facts	in	the	way	that	a	car
is,	or	a	rain	storm.	But	 facts	are	not	truth.	The	spiritual	 teachings	continually	point	this
out.	While	we	accept	it	as	a	fact	that	we	exist	surrounded	by	dead	substantial	things	and
living	substantial	entities,	the	dharma	tells	us	that	there	are	no	substantial	things	nor	are
there	separate,	intrinsically	existing	entities.	No	one	can	show	us	love	as	a	fact,	but	when
we	are	in	love	there	is	no	doubt	that	love	is	real.

The	 five	elements	are	 true	 the	way	 love	 is	 true	and	also	 the	way	a	car	 is	 true.	A	car	 is
made	from	the	elements:	the	hard	earth	of	the	metal,	the	water	of	the	gas	and	oil,	the	fire
of	the	combustion,	the	air	that	allows	the	gas	to	burn,	and	the	space	that	allows	the	car	to
exist.	Stop	thinking	of	it	as	“car”	for	a	minute	and	instead	see	it	as	the	interplay	of	the	five
elements.	This	is	how	to	think	about	the	elements.

The	story	of	the	five	lights	and	the	stories	later	in	the	book	are	not	meant	to	entertain,	nor
should	they	be	thought	of	as	factual.	Rather,	this	story	is	truer	than	fact,	and	that’s	why,	if
it	 is	 really	 understood,	 it	 can	 change	 the	 way	 we	 experience	 the	 world.	 With	 a	 deep
understanding	 of	 how	 the	 apparently	 solid	world	 is	 actually	 the	 play	 of	 pure	 elemental
light,	 peace	 can	be	 found	 even	 in	 a	 troubled	world,	 problems	 can	be	 eradicated	 before
they	 manifest,	 and	 ultimately	 the	 nature	 of	 the	 mind	 can	 be	 fully	 realized.	 There	 is	 a
sequence	or	 flow	to	all	 things	that	arise.	Knowing	this,	one	knows	how	to	stop	negative
processes	and	initiate	and	support	positive	processes.

THE	DISSOLUTION	OF	THE	ELEMENTS

Substantial	 manifestation	 begins	 in	 the	 subtle,	 non-physical	 dimension	 of	 the	 elements
and	moves	toward	grosser	manifestation.	This	is	the	creat	ive	process	by	which	things	and
entities	arise.	The	death	process,	described	in	the	prayer	at	the	front	of	this	book,	moves
in	the	reverse	direction,	from	substantial	to	insubstantial.	In	each	stage	of	death,	dictated
by	 the	 dissolution	 of	 the	 internal	 elements,	 there	 are	 particular	 physical	 and	 visionary
phenomena	experienced	by	the	dying	person.	These	correlate	to	the	energy	of	the	earth
element	 dissolving	 in	water,	water	 in	 fire,	 fire	 in	 air,	 air	 in	 space.	 Tantric	 practitioners
regularly	 train	 in	 the	 death	 process	 so	 that	 when	 death	 occurs	 they	 can	 find	 the	 path
through	it,	maintain	awareness,	and	fully	realize	the	practice.

This	 process	 of	 dissolution	 is	 not	 only	 related	 to	 death,	 but	 also	 to	 the	 processes	 of
sleeping	 and	 waking.	 Just	 as	 death	 can,	 for	 the	 prepared	 practitioner,	 reveal	 what	 is
unchanging	and	unborn,	so	can	the	dissolution	of	the	elements	in	experience	lead	to	the
realization	that	what	fundamentally	exists	is	space	and	pure	light.

UNDERSTANDING	THROUGH	THE	ELEMENTS



Thinking	in	terms	of	the	elements	does	not	mean	giving	up	our	understanding	of	modern
chemistry,	physics,	medicine,	and	psychology.	The	eleme	nts	give	us	a	more	fundamental
metaphor	that	helps	to	explain	the	dynamics	that	 lie	beneath	these	different	disciplines.
Through	 an	 understanding	 of	 the	 elements	 we	 can	 see	 that	 apparently	 different
dimensions	 of	 experience	 are	 really	 only	 subtler	 and	grosser	 levels	 of	 the	 elements.	An
excess	 of	 fire,	 for	 example,	 manifests	 in	 physical,	 energetic,	 mental,	 and	 spiritual
dimensions.	 These	 dimensions	 are	 not	 actually	 distinct	 but	 increasingly	 refined	 (or
grosser)	presentations	of	the	same	fundamentals.	So,	fire	is	the	life-giving	energy	of	the
sun	 as	 well	 as	 the	 life-destroying	 forest	 fire.	 It’s	 the	 heat	 of	 the	 digestive	 system,	 the
creativity	of	the	mind,	the	red	light	of	the	rainbow,	the	phenomenon	of	temperature,	the
emotions	of	hatred	and	desire,	the	warmth	of	compassion,	the	wisdom	of	discrimination,
and	one	of	the	five	most	subtle	and	most	fundamental	aspects	of	being.

When	we	understand	the	inclusiveness	of	the	five	elements,	we	see	that	everything	arises
together,	nothing	is	completely	separate	from	anything	else,	and	everything	is	affected	by
everything	else.	Anxiety	can	be	calmed	through	ritual,	drugs,	exercise,	meditation,	 love,
massage,	or	a	hot	bath	because	anxiety	 is	an	excess	of	 fire	or	air,	or	an	 insufficiency	of
earth	or	water.	Anything	that	addresses	this	imbalance	on	any	level	will	have	an	effect	on
every	level.	Of	course	at	any	one	time	one	method	may	be	more	suitable	than	another.	If
you’re	bleeding	badly,	it’s	better	to	place	a	bandage	or	tie	a	tourniquet	than	to	do	yoga.	Or
if	you’re	stuck	in	a	bad	mood,	it’s	better	to	be	able	to	work	with	the	energy	in	your	body
than	to	go	for	surgery.

This	view	is	accepted	in	the	West,	too,	though	not	formulated	this	way.	It	has	come	to	be
common	knowledge	that	illness	in	the	body	affects	the	mood	and	the	mind,	and	the	mind
affects	 the	 emotions	 and	 the	 body.	 This	 seems	 obvious	 now,	 yet	 only	 recently	 has
mainstream	 Western	 medicine	 begun	 to	 prescribe	 relaxation	 practices,	 exercise,
meditation,	and	yoga	to	reverse	heart	disease	and	help	with	mood	disorders.

Applying	 an	understanding	 of	 the	 elements	 to	 our	 experience,	we	 can	usefully	 describe
and	examine	any	situation	in	any	dimension.	When	we	experience	grosser	or	subtler	levels
of	the	elements,	we	are	actually	experiencing	grosser	or	subtler	levels	of	ourselves.

RELATING	ONESELF	TO	THE	ELEMENTS

As	I	wrote	earlier,	the	elements	are	associated	with	emotions,	personality	types,	cognitive
styles,	 and	 with	 other	 aspects	 of	 experience,	 including	 visio	 nary	 and	 meditative
experience.	The	elements	in	these	dimensions	can	be	recognized	directly	once	there	is	an
understanding	of	what	the	elements	are.

The	 following	 descriptions	 of	 the	 elements	 are	 not	meant	 to	 be	 exhaustive	 but	 instead
focus	 on	 the	 elements	 which	 are	 most	 directly	 accessible	 in	 experience.	 They	 do	 not
include	the	medical	aspects	of	the	elements,	which	strongly	affect	experience	but	which
are	 beyond	 the	 scope	 of	 this	 book.	 They	 point	 to	 emotional,	 energetic,	 and	 cognitive
experiences	you	already	have,	and	to	patterns	of	behavior	easily	recognized	in	yourself	or
people	 you	 know.	 The	 descriptions	 emphasize	 the	 negative	 aspects	 of	 the	 elements
because	this	 is	a	book	about	healing	and	spiritual	growth	and	the	positive	aspects	need
neither	to	be	healed	nor	overcome.

The	descriptions	are	general	in	order	to	make	them	widely	applicable.	It’s	more	helpful	to
have	 a	 broad	 understanding	 of	 the	 elements	 in	 experience	 than	 to	 amass	 details	 of
elemental	 correspondence,	 but	 it’s	 also	 good	 to	 remember,	 while	 reading	 these
simplifications,	 that	 the	 interactions	of	 the	elements	are	complex	enough	 to	give	rise	 to
everything.	Each	element	contains	 the	others	and	 they	also	work	with	and	against	each
other	in	diverse	interactions.	For	example,	if	a	fire	is	big,	air	supports	it	to	grow	greater;	if
a	fire	is	small,	the	wind	blows	it	out.	Similarly,	in	our	experience	the	elements	support	and
destroy	each	other,	and	what	happens	depends	on	the	particular	situation.

The	balance	of	the	elements	is	always	dynamic	and	changes	to	lesser	and	greater	extent
in	 different	 situations	 and	 conditions.	 It’s	 also	 true	 that	 individuals	 can	 be	 particularly
dominant	 or	 deficient	 in	 one	 or	 more	 of	 the	 elements.	 Look	 for	 consistent	 qualities	 of
experience	 and	 habitual	 behaviors	 to	 recognize	which	 of	 the	 elements	 are	 dominant	 or
deficient	in	yourself.

Earth

Earth	 is	 the	 ground	 in	 our	 ordinary	 life.	 In	 the	 shamanic	 world	 view,	 it	 is	 usually	 the
center	 of	 everything	 and	 is	 placed	 in	 the	 center	 of	 the	 mandala,	 both	 in	 graphic



representations	 a	 nd	 in	 experience.	 (In	 tantra	 and	 Dzogchen,	 space	 is	 considered	 the
ground	and	center.)

Most	 of	 the	 elemental	 qualities	 of	 earth	 can	 be	 grasped	 intuitively:	 heavy,	 solid,
connected,	secure.	Earth	has	gravity.	It	can	be	rich	and	fertile	when	in	harmony	with	the
other	elements—when	 there	 is	 enough	heat,	moisture,	 and	good	air.	 It	 can	also	be	cold
and	unbearable	without	enough	heat,	arid	and	harsh	without	enough	water,	and	stale	and
lifeless	without	enough	air.

When	 earth	 is	 balanced	 in	 us,	 we	 feel	 stable,	 grounded,	 confident.	We	 are	 neither	 too
heavy	nor	too	airy.	We	are	rooted	in	our	experience.	We	are	not	easily	knocked	off	balance
nor	do	we	 lose	touch	with	what	 is	 important.	When	we	know	something,	we	do	not	 lose
that	 knowledge.	 Our	 faith	 is	 steady.	 Our	 intentions	 do	 not	 easily	 get	 swept	 aside	 by
impulse	and	our	efforts	are	consistent.	We	are	responsible	and	can	stand	on	our	own.	The
higher	dimension	of	this	quality	is	to	be	grounded	in	pure	being.

If	there	is	too	much	earth,	we	are	plodding,	dull,	lazy,	and	dim.	Too	solid.	Unable	to	move.
Our	 thinking	 is	 heavy,	 literal,	 and	 lacking	 creativity.	 Too	 much	 earth	 can	 result	 in
depression	 or	 being	 stuck	 or	 resigned—in	 our	 careers	 or	 relationships	 or	 spiritual
practices.	Then	it	becomes	difficult	to	bring	about	change;	we	identify	with	problems	and
they	seem	very	solid.	We	like	to	sleep.	We	try	to	meditate	but	nod	off.	And	after	we	sleep,
it	can	be	hard	to	recall	dreams	in	their	entirety	or	at	all.	An	excess	of	earth	can	make	us
insensitive	 and	uninspired.	 Too	much	 earth	may	mean	being	 quiet	 all	 the	 time	 or,	 once
having	started	talking,	being	unable	to	stop.	Being	late	for	every	appointment	or	punctual
to	the	minute	can	both	be	expressions	of	earth.	Traditionally,	the	negative	aspect	of	earth
is	ignorance.

If	we	have	too	little	earth	we	are	without	anchor.	We	are	flighty,	spacy,	or	agitated.	Unable
to	 complete	 what	 we	 begin,	 we	 are	 ungrounded	 and	 dissatisfied.	 We’re	 not	 at	 home
anywhere;	we’re	always	looking	for	what	will	ground	us	and	make	us	secure.

If	we	are	deficient	in	earth,	there	are	different	ways	to	get	grounded.	Besides	doing	the
exercises	described	later	in	this	book,	we	can	use	additional	approaches.	For	example,	a
secure	 home,	 a	 healthy	 relationship,	 or	 a	 solid	 job	 may	 help	 generate	 the	 sense	 of
groundedness.	 Such	 corrections	 of	 the	 external	 situation	 can	 be	 appropriate	 in	 certain
situations.	Once	security	is	developed	externally,	the	sense	of	stability	can	serve	as	a	base
upon	 which	 to	 develop	 positive	 internal	 qualities.	 Usually	 it’s	 best	 to	 find	 the	 positive
quality	inside	oneself	and	manifest	it	outwardly,	but	sometimes	reversing	the	sequence	is
helpful.

When	 we	 identify	 ourselves	 as	 substantial,	 physical	 entities,	 we	 will	 naturally	 try	 to
ground	 ourselves	 in	 substantial,	 external	 conditions.	 When	 we	 identify	 as	 energetic
beings,	we	will	try	to	ground	in	our	feelings.	When	we	identify	with	pure	awareness,	we
will	find	the	ground	in	the	nature	of	mind.	The	gross	mind	feels	stability	in	solid	earth;	the
more	subtle,	impersonal	awareness	grounds	in	space.

In	terms	of	meditation	practice,	balanced	earth	is	a	great	and	necessary	support.	Even	in
the	 highest	 practices,	 such	 as	 the	 emptiness	 practices	 in	 sutra	 or	 Cutting	 Through
(trekchöd)	 in	Dzogchen,	 concentration	 practices	 that	 develop	 the	 qualities	 of	 earth	 and
the	stability	of	mind	are	recommended.	The	mind	must	be	stable	to	progress	on	the	path
of	 meditation,	 and	 that	 stability	 arises	 as	 a	 development	 from	 strengthening	 the	 earth
element.	 In	 the	 teachings	 it	 is	 said	 that	 people	who	 are	 predominantly	 fire	 and	 air	will
quickly	 have	 spiritual	 experiences	 but	 they	will	 also	 quickly	 lose	 them.	 People	who	 are
predominantly	earth	and	water	may	be	slower	to	have	the	experiences	but,	when	they	do,
they	are	able	to	sustain	and	develop	them	and	ultimately	will	develop	faster.

If	you	are	ungrounded	 in	your	meditative	practice,	develop	 the	quality	of	earth	 through
developing	 concentration.	 Practice	 steadiness	 of	mind	 and	 body.	 Eat	 heavier	 foods	 and
avoid	stimulants.	Exercise.	Usually	we	already	know	what	to	do	to	remedy	problems	in	our
practice	but	we	don’t	do	 it.	Making	ourselves	do	what	 is	best	 is	one	way	to	develop	the



consistency	of	the	earth	element.

Once	stability	of	mind	is	developed	through	concentration,	the	unwanted	movement	of	the
mind	slows	and	stops.	Experience	is	clear	and	grounded	in	silence,	not	filled	with	buzzing
thoughts.	 Lights	 and	 colors	 are	 sharper.	 If	 we	 are	 already	 introduced	 to	 the	 nature	 of
mind,	it	becomes	easier	to	continue	in	the	natural	state	and	to	integrate	the	practice	with
all	activities.	Mindfulness	becomes	easy	and	can	be	maintained	throughout	 the	day,	and
ultimately	throughout	the	night.	When	the	mind	is	stable,	insight	naturally	arises.	This	is
the	mind	waking.	It	is	not	concentration	but	is	a	higher	level	of	practice	that	arises	from
mental	stability.

If	 there	 is	 too	much	 earth,	 the	 approach	 is	 quite	 different.	 Eat	 lighter	 foods	 and	 try	 to
avoid	exhaustion.	Practice	being	flexible	in	your	thinking.	Call	on	the	elemental	qualities
of	air	and	fire	to	generate	flexibility,	creativity,	and	liveliness.

When	the	earth	element	is	fully	developed	in	spiritual	practice	it	becomes	the	wisdom	of
equanimity.	This	is	the	higher	spiritual	capacity	of	earth	that	allows	the	practitioner	to	be
grounded	 and	 even	 in	 any	 situation,	 however	 extreme,	 and	 to	 recognize	 the	 luminous
innate-awareness	common	to	all	experience.

Water

When	the	water	element	is	in	balance,	there	is	comfort	in	ourselves	and	in	our	lives.	We
can	 be	 fluid,	 moving	 easily	 around	 and	 through	 the	 events	 and	 relationships	 of	 life.
Balanced	water	 is	accepti	ng	of	situations.	 It	 is	 joyful,	content.	The	higher	dimension	of
water	 in	personal	experience	 is	 the	 joy	of	being,	a	 contentment	with	being	alive	 that	 is
innate	rather	than	dependent	on	external	circumstances.	When	we	are	connected	to	the
joy	of	the	water	element,	it	manifests	outwardly.	We	tend	to	be	happy	with	the	people	we
meet,	the	places	we	go.	We	enjoy	life.

This	 joy	 can	be	 lost	 in	 the	unavoidable	 suffering	 that	accompanies	dualistic	 experience.
And	then	we	often	look	outside	for	it,	believing	that	we	will	be	comfortable	in	life	when	we
get	the	new	partner,	job,	riches,	degree,	recognition,	or	whatever	the	focus	of	the	moment
is.	We	think	joy	is	found	in	having	and	doing,	rather	than	in	being.

In	a	person	dominated	by	the	water	element	there	can	be	a	lot	of	feeling	and	emotion	and
sometimes	 too	much	comfort.	Too	much	comfort	means	 letting	responsibilities	slide	and
floating	through	life.	It	means	being	lost	in	the	comfort,	losing	presence,	feeling	content	in
situations	that	should	be	changed,	or	lacking	productivity.	There	is	a	tendency	not	to	work
hard	at	what	is	difficult	even	if	this	means	giving	up	what	is	valuable.

In	meditation,	too	much	water	can	diminish	clarity.	This	is	not	the	dullness	and	heaviness
of	earth	but	a	kind	of	weak	drifting	that	makes	it	difficult	to	accomplish	tasks	and	enjoy
their	fruits.

Too	much	water	can	also	result	in	our	being	lost	in	emotion,	constantly	tossed	and	turned
on	the	waves	of	feeling,	too	sensitive	to	transient	emotional	states,	weepy,	or	trapped	in
self-pity.	Rather	than	being	stuck	in	the	comfort	of	the	water	element,	we’re	stuck	in	the
ebb	and	flow	of	emotion.

Too	 little	 water	 results	 in	 discomfort	 in	 ourselves,	 a	 lack	 of	 joy,	 and	 a	 lack	 of	 comfort
around	other	people.	Even	if	we’re	grounded	in	earth,	if	we	have	too	little	water	it	is	a	dry
kind	of	 solidity,	without	 pleasure	 or	 appreciation.	 If	 both	 earth	 and	water	 are	deficient,
we’ll	 be	 dominated	 by	 fire	 or	 air	 or	 both,	 resulting	 in	 a	 lack	 of	 groundedness	 and



excessive	 agitation.	 Too	 little	 water	 in	 meditation	 means	 internal	 discomfort	 in	 the
practice	and	a	loss	of	the	joy	in	the	spiritual	path.	The	practice	can	become	infertile	and
arid.

Practices	 that	 develop	 the	 positive	 aspects	 of	 water	 are	 the	 affective	 practices.	 For
practitioners	of	the	Tibetan	traditions	these	would	be	Guru	Yoga	that	opens	the	heart;	the
development	of	 love	and	compassion;	and	 the	practice	of	giving	and	receiving.	Spiritual
practice	can	become	a	project	of	the	mind	alone	if	the	heart	is	not	involved;	in	the	Tibetan
traditions,	 compassion	 and	 love	 are	 considered	 necessary	 on	 the	 spiritual	 path.	 The
highest	development	of	the	water	element	in	spiritual	practice	is	the	development	of	the
mirror-like	wisdom.

Fire

The	positive	aspect	of	fire	is	the	capacity	to	create,	to	initiate	projects	on	every	level,	and
to	accomplish	what	creativity	sets	 in	motion.	Intuition	 is	related	to	fire	as	 is	enthusiasm
and	excitement.	Ba	lanced	fire	results	in	inspired	undertakings,	happiness	with	work,	and
accomplishment.	Fire	is	related	to	a	bliss	and	joy	that	is	different	from	the	joy	of	the	water
element,	 which	 is	 connected	 to	 contentment	 and	 acceptance.	 The	 joy	 of	 fire	 is	 more
related	to	enthusiasm	and	bliss	in	the	body,	and	the	joy	of	waking	experiences.	The	higher
experience	of	 fire	 is	 the	bliss	of	being.	 Its	highest	expression	 is	 the	development	of	 the
wisdom	of	discrimination.

People	with	 too	much	 fire	 are	 easily	 agitated.	 Simple	 things	 ignite	 their	 irritability	 and
they	may	 react	 impulsively,	 lashing	 out	 without	 thinking,	 in	 angry	words	 and	 gestures.
Lacking	 tolerance,	 they	 can	 be	 annoyed	 by	 different	 religions,	 different	 races,	 different
philosophies.	 They	 even	 can	 become	 annoyed	 by	 the	 way	 someone	 else	 is	 sitting	 or
talking.

Because	 fire	 is	 the	opposite	of	earth,	 too	much	fire	often	results	 in	a	 lack	of	grounding.
There	is	a	lot	of	fast	movement	and	instability.	If	there	is	also	a	lack	of	water,	there	can	be
a	persistent	discomfort	and	restlessness.	 It’s	difficult	 to	sit	still	 for	 five	minutes;	 there’s
always	 something	 to	 do.	 Silence	 and	 stillness	 can	 be	 bothersome.	 There	 are	 difficulties
sleeping.	 People	 with	 too	much	 fire	 often	 like	 to	 talk	 a	 lot,	 and	 quickly.	 The	 next	 idea
arises	before	the	present	one	is	articulated.	Everything	just	keeps	coming.

In	meditation	practice,	 too	much	fire	results	 in	 thoughts	 that	come	fast	and	are	hard	to
control.	New	ideas	continually	arise	that	seem	too	important	to	put	aside.	There’s	a	lack
of	calm,	a	 lack	of	peace,	and	too	much	agitation	and	restlessness.	The	agitation	may	be
arise	from	a	relative	lack	of	water;	the	instability	may	be	a	lack	of	earth.

Without	enough	fire	on	the	spiritual	path,	the	practitioner	lacks	the	energy	and	inspiration
required	 to	 do	 the	 practice	 or	 has	 a	 difficult	 time	 finding	 joy	 and	 bliss	 in	 it.	 Instead,
practice	is	done	by	rote,	without	the	inspiration	to	make	the	leap	to	a	new	understanding
or	a	new	experience.	As	a	result	the	development	of	the	practice	is	much	slower.

When	fire	is	deficient,	there	is	also	a	lack	of	vitality	and	a	lack	of	inspiration.	There	is	no
enjoyment	 in	 work.	 There’s	 no	 enthusiasm.	 Nothing	 new	 arises.	 Life	 can	 be	 a	 cycle	 of



routine,	plodding	existence.	Or,	 if	 fire	 is	deficient	when	 there	 is	a	preponderance	of	air,
there	can	be	movement,	but	 it	 is	repetitive	and	uncreative.	Intellectually	the	person	can
be	very	sharp—due	to	the	air—but	not	be	able	to	create	from	what	is	learned.

Practices	 that	 develop	 fire	 are	 the	 inner	 heat	 (tummo),	 made	 famous	 through	 the
documentation	of	practitioners	sitting	 in	snow,	drying	wet	towels	solely	with	the	heat	of
their	 bodies;	 the	 practice	 of	 the	 external	 rushen,	 in	 which	 one	 surrenders	 to	 the
experience	of	karmic	tendencies	in	order	to	differentiate	them	from	pure	experience;	and
some	of	the	physical	yogas.

Air

Air	 is	 the	element	that	carries	change	and,	when	 it	 is	developed,	one	can	transform	the
negative	 into	 the	 positive,	 hate	 into	 love,	 jealousy	 into	 openness,	 greed	 into	 generosity,
pride	 and	 egoism	 into	 peace.	 Air	 is	 rela	 ted	 to	 curiosity	 and	 learning	 and	 flexibility	 of
intellect.	In	its	highest	aspect,	it	is	the	wisdom	of	accomplishment.

When	air	is	dominant,	the	qualities	of	earth	and	water	are	usually	deficient.	Then	there	is
little	 stability	 or	 contentment.	 It’s	 difficult	 to	 stick	 to	 anything.	 If	 we	 are	 in	 one	 place,
another	looks	better,	and	when	we’re	in	the	new	place,	we	want	to	be	somewhere	else.	It’s
hard	to	accept	things	as	they	are,	difficult	to	find	and	connect	to	comfort	in	what	is.	We
may	be	 jittery,	unable	 to	 focus,	worried,	or	 flighty.	Happiness	gives	way	 to	unhappiness
when	even	a	small	negativity	 is	encountered.	Resolution	gives	way	to	uncertainty.	Belief
crumbles	easily.	There	is	no	inner	gravity,	so	external	influences	drag	us	this	way	and	that.

When	air	 is	 deficient,	 it’s	 easy	 to	get	 stuck.	Things	become	difficult	 to	 change.	When	a
worry	arises,	it	remains.	When	a	simple	concern	arises,	it	lodges	inside.

When	there	is	balanced	air,	worry	and	concern	give	way	to	the	next	thing—a	resolution	is
found.	Balanced	air	 allows	us	 to	be	 flexible.	 If	 things	go	wrong,	we	can	 still	 appreciate
other	aspects	of	experience:	there	can	be	bad	news	and	a	beautiful	sky	at	the	same	time.
Air	allows	the	mind	to	move	in	new	directions,	to	see	things	from	different	perspectives,
and	 this	 allows	 the	 accumulation	 of	 knowledge	 and	 understanding.	 How	 fast	 you	 can
change	 your	 negative	 anger	 or	 depression	 or	 annoyance	 or	 self-pity	 into	 something
positive	has	to	do	with	how	developed	your	air	element	is.

The	 air	 element	 is	 also	 the	 prana,	 which	 carries	 the	 mind.	 This	 is	 why,	 in	 tantra	 and
Dzogchen,	physical	movements	and	postures	are	recommended	to	control	the	air	element
in	order	to	support	particular	experiences.	When	the	air	is	disturbed,	it’s	difficult	for	the
mind	 to	 concentrate.	 It’s	 difficult	 to	 sit	 for	 meditation.	 There	 is	 impatience.	 Questions
arise	and	there	 is	a	need	to	ask	them.	When	there	 is	 too	much	air,	 it	 is	difficult	 to	have
experiences	of	 the	empty	basis	of	everything,	 the	kunzhi,	because	 the	mind	and	energy
are	darting	this	way	and	that,	attracted	to	clarity	and	manifestation.

Air	 connects	 everything.	 It	 has	 to	 do	 with	 every	 kind	 of	 communication.	 As	 prana,
elemental	air	pervades	everywhere	and	everything;	it	is	the	essential	energy	of	existence.

In	Tibetan	practices	performed	at	 the	 time	of	death,	 the	 lama	 summons	 the	dead	 spirit
through	 the	 air	 element,	 through	 inhalation.	Once	 the	 spirit	 is	 contacted,	 the	 lama	will
help	him	or	her	to	resolve	what	was	left	unresolved	at	death.

Some	of	the	tantras	talk	about	air	in	relation	to	magical	powers.	Magic	always	has	to	do
with	 transformation;	 without	 the	 elemental	 energy	 of	 air	 there	 is	 no	 transformation.
Traditionally,	 a	 lack	 of	 air	 is	 said	 to	 inhibit	 the	 ability	 to	 perform	magic	 and	 makes	 it
difficult	to	direct	one’s	rebirth.



When	there	 is	a	 lack	of	air,	 there’s	often	a	 lack	of	progress	 in	spiritual	practices	and	an
inability	to	transform	what	arises	into	practice.

Practices	 that	 develop	 air	 are	 the	 tsa	 lung	 practices	 that	 work	 with	 the	 channels	 and
prana	 in	 the	 body.	 These	 include	 the	 physical	 yoga	 of	 trul	 khor;	 the	 pho	 wa,	 or
transference	of	consciousness;	contemplative	breathing,	during	which	the	central	channel
is	 opened	 using	 the	 breath	 and	 visualization;	 and	 so	 on.	 Some	 of	 these	 practices	 are
described	in	detail	later	in	this	book.	In	general,	practices	related	to	air	separate	the	pure
and	impure	prana,	which	also	means	separating	the	pure	and	impure	mind	states.	Air	 is
the	element	that	allows	for	the	discrimination	and	separation	of	these	states.

Space

Everything	arises	from	space,	exists	in	space,	and	dissolves	into	space.	In	us	that	sacred
element	of	space	manifests	as	awareness.	Experience	is	what	arises	in	awareness,	as	the
content	of	awareness,	but	it	is	not	something	other	than		awareness.

When	the	space	element	 is	balanced	 in	us,	 there	 is	room	in	 life;	whatever	arises	can	be
accommodated.	There	is	enough	time,	enough	emotional	capacity,	enough	tolerance.	The
elements	 of	 experience	 all	 fit;	 they	 are	 neither	 too	 much	 nor	 too	 little.	 We	 are	 not
dissociated	 from	 experience	 nor	 completely	 caught	 by	 it.	 Rather	 than	 running	 after	 or
away	from	the	content	of	experience,	we	are	more	rooted	in	ourselves	or	the	one	who	is
experiencing.

When	space	dominates,	we	are	“spacy”	and	can’t	connect	to	the	contents	of	space,	that	is,
to	the	other	elements.	This	state	is	not	an	integration	with	the	nature	of	mind.	We	simply
lose	connection.	There	can	be	a	loss	of	meaning,	not	from	the	depression	that	can	happen
when	 earth	 dominates,	 but	 from	 a	 kind	 of	 superficial	 connection	 to	 life	 that	 leaves	 us
rootless	and	drifting.	Too	much	space	results	in	a	lack	of	awareness,	a	lack	of	presence.
We	become	lost	and	out	of	touch.

While	too	much	space	causes	us	to	 lose	touch	with	the	qualities	that	arise	 in	space,	 too
little	 space	 leaves	 us	 dominated	 by	 whatever	 arises.	 Everything	 seems	 solid	 and
impenetrable.	Small	problems	can	be	overwhelming,	big	problems	devastating.	Too	little
space	makes	it	easier	for	another	element	to	dominate	and	to	determine	our	reactions.

A	 person	with	 balanced	 space	may	work	 full	 time,	 have	 a	 family,	 take	 care	 of	 a	 home,



meditate	and	engage	in	spiritual	practices,	and	accommodate	everything.	There	is	enough
space	for	everything.	Another	person	in	the	same	situation	but	with	too	little	space	can’t
stand	it;	the	work	is	too	much,	the	kids	are	a	bother,	there’s	no	time	for	friends,	there’s	no
time	to	cook	and	no	way	to	relax.	And	a	third	person,	in	the	same	situation	but	dominated
by	space,	drifts	through	life;	the	job	isn’t	important,	the	kids	are	distant,	the	spouse	is	a
roommate,	tasks	get	done	or	don’t.	There	isn’t	enough	focus.

We	usually	identify	with	our	external	situations:	our	jobs,	relationships,	interests,	bodies,
and	so	on.	This	 is	 identifying	with	the	contents	of	space,	the	experience	rather	than	the
experiencer.	 Of	 course,	 then,	 when	 we	 lose	 some	 of	 these	 things,	 we	 feel	 lost.	 The
relationship	ends,	the	job	ends,	we	move	to	a	new	place,	and	we	say	we’re	lost.	We’re	in-
between	things	and	we	don’t	quite	know	who	or	what	we	are.

If	we	 fully	 integrate	with	 the	space	element,	we	know	 the	nature	of	mind.	Then	we	are
free	because	we	are	no	 longer	bound	by	what	arises	 in	experience.	We	realize	our	 true
nature	 and	 do	 not	 try	 to	 find	 ourselves	 in	 the	 particulars	 of	 our	 situation.	 We	 are
connected	 to	 the	 essence	 and	don’t	 look	 outside	 to	 find	 the	 cause	 of	 our	 problems.	We
know	 any	 problem	we	 are	 experiencing	 is	 simply	 something	 arising	 in	 space;	 we	 don’t
have	to	become	the	problem.	We	can	support	ourselves	through	the	experience	of	being
rather	 than	 through	how	others	 see	us	 or	what	we	have	 or	what	we	do.	 There	 is	more
acceptance	of	ourselves	and	of	what	we	encounter.

For	 example,	 a	 man	 who	 has	 a	 beautiful	 family	 and	 a	 successful	 business,	 and	 who
identifies	 himself	 with	 both,	 can	 lose	 both.	 Then	 he	 can	 lose	 himself	 or	 open	 himself,
depending	on	his	 relationship	 to	space.	A	painful	 situation	can	result	 in	a	negative	or	a
positive	outcome,	depending	on	the	response.	With	the	loss	of	external	definition,	identity
can	become	either	constricted,	fearful,	and	fragile	or	it	can	expand	outside	of	its	normal
confines	by	identifying	with	the	space	in	which	experience	arises.

In	 meditation	 practice,	 unbalanced	 space	 results	 in	 a	 lack	 of	 focus	 and	 presence.	 The
mind	 is	easily	distracted	by	whatever	arises	 in	 it	because	one	 identifies	with	experience
rather	 than	 the	 basis	 of	 experience.	 Dzogchen	 is	 the	 main	 practice	 for	 developing	 the
space	 element,	 but	 space	 is	 also	 realized	 as	 the	 other	 four	 elements	 are	 brought	 into
increasing	balance.	The	wisdom	of	emptiness	is	related	to	space.

THE	ELEMENTS	AND	OUR	WELL-BEING

The	ideal	physical	environment	for	humans	is	a	land	where	the	earth	is	fertile	and	healthy,
the	 water	 plentiful	 and	 pure,	 the	 air	 clean	 and	 fresh,	 and	 the	 temperature	 moderate.
There	should	be	enough	space	for	our	farms,	animals,	cities,		and	projects.	In	other	words,
it	 should	 be	 an	 environment	 where	 the	 elements	 are	 ideally	 balanced	 for	 our	 human
needs.	Of	course	we	can	live	in	a	range	of	environments,	from	the	freezing,	arid	plateaus
of	Tibet	 to	deserts,	swamps,	rain	 forests,	and	arctic	wilds.	The	harsher	climates	require
more	from	us,	more	energy	and	struggle,	than	does	the	ideal	environment.

Similarly,	the	quality	of	our	lives	is	best	when	the	internal	elements	are	balanced,	but	we
can	 survive—and	 do—in	 unbalanced	 states.	 The	 biological	 functions	 of	 our	 bodies	 are
considered	normal	in	a	certain	range:	blood	pressure	should	be	between	here	and	there;
hormone	levels	between	this	and	that.	As	the	functions	move	out	of	the	optimum	range,
negative	effects	 increase.	When	 the	 imbalance	 is	great	enough,	 the	body	 is	damaged	or
dies.	This	is	true	in	our	other	dimensions,	too.	Emotions	are	considered	normal	within	less
clearly	 defined	 ranges.	 Nearly	 everyone	 has	 periods	 of	 depression,	 but	 they	 are	 not
considered	a	problem	unless	they	are	very	serious	or	chronic.	Fear	is	a	normal	experience
in	 frightening	 situations,	 but	 constant	 fear	 and	 anxiety	 is	 considered	 abnormal	 and
debilitating.	The	point	is	not	to	get	rid	of	our	emotions,	but	to	balance	them.	For	example,
beings	in	the	realms	of	the	gods	are	understood	not	to	be	beyond	emotion,	but	to	live	with
their	internal	forces	in	such	balance	that	they	are	consistently	blissful.

We	 can	 be	 successful,	 have	 good	 relationships,	 and	 enjoy	 our	 lives,	 but	 if	 we’re
unbalanced,	we’ll	never	 feel	 exactly	 right.	Conversely,	when	 the	elements	are	balanced,
we	can	live	in	difficult	situations,	with	little	material	wealth,	with	few	friends	and	so	on,
and	remain	stable,	centered,	and	flexible.	We	may	not	like	the	situation	we’re	in,	but	we’ll
be	comfortable	in	ourselves.

Study	 of	 and	 practice	with	 the	 elements	 is	meant	 to	 positively	 affect	 our	well-being	 by
giving	 us	 the	 tools	 to	 bring	 the	 elements	 into	 the	 balance	 that	 underlies	 health	 and
wholeness	in	any	dimension	of	experience.	It	does	not	take	great	intuition	to	know	when



we	are	in	or	out	of	balance.	We	all	know	these	experiences.	They	fall	along	a	continuum
from	 the	 most	 disturbed	 imbalance—psychosis	 or	 serious	 illness—to	 perfect	 balance,
which	occurs	only	when	we	can	abide	 in	 the	nature	of	mind,	 the	buddha-nature.	 In	our
daily	 lives	we	are	 somewhere	 in	between,	moving	 from	being	more	 in	balance	 to	being
more	out	of	balance,	and	back	again.

The	idea	of	balancing	elemental	energies	can	be	usefully	applied	to	any	human	function,
quality,	 or	 activity:	 health,	 relationship,	 spiritual	 practice,	 psychological	 make-up,
emotional	state,	physical	environment,	and	so	on.	Using	 imbalance	of	 the	elements	as	a
primary	metaphor,	we	can	understand	illness	and	unhappiness	as	well	as	obstructions	on
all	 levels	 of	 spiritual	 practice.	 Balancing	 the	 elements	 then	 becomes	 a	 metaphor	 for
healing,	for	the	development	of	positive	qualities	and	capacities,	and	for	the	elimination	of
negative	qualities.	If	one	element	dominates,	we	need	to	cultivate	its	opposite.	If	we	are
dominated	by	fire,	for	example,	then	we	try	to	activate	water	or	earth,	and	vice	versa.	If
earth	 is	 dominant—we	 are	 dull,	 sleepy,	 heavy—then	 we	 activate	 air	 or	 fire.	 And	 if	 air
dominates	us—we	are	flighty,	nervous,	with	a	short	attention	span—then	we	activate	earth
or	 water.	 There	 are	 many	 obvious	 examples	 of	 balancing	 in	 everyday	 life:	 if	 a	 fever
becomes	life-threatening,	we	may	be	told	to	soak	in	cold	water;	if	we	become	too	cold,	we
apply	warmth;	and	if	we’re	dehydrated,	we	drink	water.

By	nature,	all	conceptualizations	are	symbolic	and	the	five	elements	are	symbols	of	great
depth	and	long	tradition.	Beyond	metaphor,	however,	the	five	elements	are	energies	that
can	 be	 worked	 with	 directly	 by	 the	 practitioner	 through	 physical	 actions,	 energetic
movement,	and	the	flow	of	awareness.

HOW	THE	ELEMENTS	BECOME	UNBALANCED

Each	of	us	begins	 life	as	a	unique	manifestation	of	 the	elements.	We	carry	very	specific
karmic	determinants	that	make	one	individual	distinct	from	another.	If	we	were	perfectly
balanced	at	birth,	we	would	be	born	as	fully	realized	buddhas.	However	we	are	born		as
ordinary	 beings,	 which	 means	 the	 elements	 are	 imbalanced	 to	 some	 extent.	 If	 the
imbalance	at	birth	 is	great,	 it	may	be	obvious.	For	example,	on	the	gross	physical	 level,
being	born	with	a	metabolic	problem	that	makes	 it	 impossible	to	digest	 food	properly	 is
quickly	 recognized.	 We	 would	 call	 this	 a	 lack	 of	 fire.	 Even	 small	 differences	 in	 the
strengths	and	combinations	of	elemental	energies	create	 the	different	characteristics	of
the	individual,	the	variations	in	temperament	and	mental	faculties	as	well	as	the	physical
differences.

After	 birth,	 the	 environment	 and	 the	 individual’s	 responses	 to	 the	 environment	 further
affect	 the	 dynamics	 of	 the	 elements.	 Accidents	 and	 crises—the	 situations	 that	 evoke	 a
strong	reaction	or	a	shutting	down—have	consequences,	as	do	even	the	smallest	decisions
and	gestures.

Each	action	that	we	take,	on	any	level,	is	an	expression	of	the	elemental	qualities	in	some
combination	or	interplay,	and	a	reinforcement	of	the	conditions	that	generated	it.	Anger,
for	 an	 easy	 example,	 is	 usually	 a	 fiery	 response.	 If	 we	 habitually	 react	 with	 anger,	 we
cultivate	the	fire	 in	ourselves,	 though	 in	this	 instance	 it’s	a	negative	attribute	of	 fire.	 In
the	 same	 way,	 because	 creativity	 is	 connected	 to	 the	 luminous	 fire	 nature,	 when	 we
respond	creatively	we	are	also	developing	 the	 fire	element	 in	ourselves,	 in	 this	 case	 its
positive	aspects.	Over	 time	our	habitual	actions	and	 reactions	 favor	 the	development	of
certain	elements	and	often	leave	others	less	cultivated	or	weaker.	This	process	is	further
strengthened	 by	 cultural	 norms	 that	 favor	 some	 elemental	 qualities	 over	 others.	 To
continue	with	the	fire	example,	growing	up	in	a	social	group	that	favors	aggressive,	fiery
reactions,	we	will	tend	to	develop	those	qualities	to	the	detriment	of	softer,	more	watery
responses	to	the	world.

Elemental	imbalance	can	be	either	temporary	or	life-long.	For	example,	a	person	may	be
easy	with	other	people	and	confident	in	general	but	be	extremely	anxious	in	a	particular
situation	 such	 as	 public	 speaking	 or	 taking	 a	 test.	 A	 chronically	 shy	 individual	 can
sometimes	become	outgoing	and	self-confident	after	drinking	alcohol.	A	happy	person	can
become	 depressed	 after	 the	 loss	 of	 a	 relationship.	 A	 person	 of	 great	 faith	 can	 become
insecure	and	nihilistic	when	faced	with	the	death	of	a	loved	one.	These	are	all	temporary
shifts	in	elemental	balance	due	to	external	events.

Such	shifts	happen	from	moment	to	moment.	After	a	heavy	lunch	we	become	drowsy	and
dominated	by	earth.	If	we	are	called	in	to	talk	to	the	boss,	we	may	lose	our	connection	to
earth	and	become	dominated	by	air	and	worry.	An	exhausting	meeting	when	we’re	tired



may	 result	 in	 a	 loss	 of	 the	 creativity	 of	 fire—which	 later	 can	 be	 stimulated	 in	 a	 good
conversation	with	friends.

Almost	 anything	 can	 imbalance	 the	 elements:	 diet,	 thoughts,	 emotions,	movies,	 friends,
culture,	illness,	and	so	forth.	But	that	does	not	make	our	situation	as	fragile	as	it	sounds.
We	can	also	balance	the	elements	through	diet,	thoughts,	emotions,	movies,	and	so	on.	For
example,	if	we	are	too	airy,	something	as	simple	as	spending	time	with	grounded,	earthy
friends	can	help	us.

Certain	imbalances	can	be	more	fixed,	such	as	long-standing	character	traits	or	habitual
tendencies	 that	 tend	 to	 keep	 reinforcing	 themselves.	 The	way	we	 speak,	 the	 colors	we
like,	and	the	way	we	walk	and	move	our	hands	are	expressions	of	the	elements	and	in	all
these	we	can,	if	we	know	what	we	are	looking	at,	see	which	element	or	elements	dominate
us.	 In	 the	West,	 people	 tend	 to	 think	 about	 such	 things	 in	 psychological	 terms,	 but	 the
interactions	of	the	elements	are	more	basic	than	the	level	of	psychological	manifestation.

Some	people	can	be	relatively	balanced	naturally.	They	may	have	enough	space,	enough
comfort,	 groundedness,	 creativity,	 and	 flexibility.	 The	 higher	 qualities	 may	 be	 present:
compassion,	love,	generosity,	patience,	and	so	on.	And	the	physical	being	may	be	equally
balanced.	We’ve	all	met	people	like	this.	They	tend	to	be	healthy	and	happy,	capable	and
confident.	They	work	on	the	situations	of	their	lives	and	make	them	supportive:	their	jobs
and	relationships	are	good.

But	 then	one	of	 life’s	 inevitable	 tragedies	occurs.	They	 fall	 ill	 or	a	 loved	one	dies.	They
may	be	cheated	in	business	or	have	a	car	accident.	Perhaps	there	is	a	natural	recovery	or
perhaps	 the	 balance	 is	 lost.	 We	 hear	 these	 stories	 all	 the	 time:	 the	 man	 who	 doesn’t
recover	from	the	loss	of	his	wife,	the	woman	who	can’t	cope	with	her	cancer.	Everything	is
turned	upside	down.	The	meaning	of	life	becomes	questionable	and	elusive.	Faith	wavers
or	is	lost.	The	elements	have	gone	out	of	balance.	Perhaps	the	stability	is	gone,	or	the	joy,
or	the	creativity.	Such	people	come	to	be	dominated	by	one	element—angry	all	the	time	or
depressed	or	distracted	or	spaced-out	or	sad.

People	 can	 stay	 lost	 for	 the	 remainder	 of	 their	 lives	 or	 can	 begin	 to	 try	 to	 address	 the
disharmony.	They	may	go	to	a	doctor	or	change	their	diets	or	start	exercise	plans	or	go	to
therapists.	 Religious	 affiliation	 may	 be	 renewed	 or	 begun.	 If	 they	 have	 not	 already
intentionally	 started	 the	 spiritual	 journey,	beginning	 in	 response	 to	 suffering	 is	 the	best
response.

In	all	of	these	different	attempts	at	healing,	something	is	either	cultivated	or	eliminated.
Stop	 eating	 this,	 start	 eating	 that;	 stop	 thinking	 that	 way,	 think	 this	 way;	 let	 go	 of
sedentary	habits,	start	new	activity	habits.	When	something	feels	wrong	in	our	lives,	we
want	something	to	change;	we	want	to	have	more	of	something	that	we	feel	is	lacking,	or
get	rid	of	something	that	we	feel	is	disturbing.

There	 is	 a	 natural	 impulse	 in	 us	 toward	 balance	 just	 as	 there	 is	 a	 natural	 pull	 toward
increased	 awareness	 and	 spiritual	 growth.	 Both	 can	 be	 perverted	 or	 denied,	 but	 the
wisdom	that	can	lead	us	toward	balance	is	inherent	in	our	being.

THE	ARISING	OF	PROBLEMS

A	disturbance	in	life	can	show	up	in	any	dimension	of	experience.	It	can	be	physical,	such
as	a	disease	manifested	in	the	body.	A	doctor	may	be	consulted,	x-rays	made,	blood	tests
performed.	 The	 disease	 is	 named.	 It	 has	 a	 form:	 it	 is	 a	 bacteria	 or	 virus	 or	 cancer—
something	 substantial.	 And	 th	e	 disease	 is	 treated	with	 something	 substantial:	 a	 pill	 or
injection,	a	chemical	or	herb.	Or	the	problem	may	be	primarily	mental.	It’s	a	problem	in
the	mind,	though	the	health	of	the	body	may	suffer.	Then,	perhaps,	the	person	goes	to	a
psychotherapist,	 tries	 to	 understand	 the	 problem	 intellectually,	 tries	 to	 understand	 the
emotions,	tries	to	find	the	meaning	in	what	is	occurring,	or	tries	to	change	the	way	he	or
she	is	thinking	about	the	situation	or	him-	or	herself.

Tibetan	 culture	 also	 recognizes	 a	 third	 area	 in	which	 problems	manifest:	 the	 energetic
dimension.	 Traditionally	 the	 disturbances	 here	 are	 those	 that	 cannot	 be	 medically
diagnosed.	 They	 are	 believed	 to	 be	 the	 result	 of	 negative	 interference	 by	 non-physical
beings.	Then	the	diagnosis	must	be	made	through	less	substantial	means	such	as	inquiry,
divination,	 intuition,	dreams,	or	astrology.	The	treatment	methods	are	also	insubstantial:
exorcism	through	contact	with	sacred	texts	and	other	objects,	purification	through	smoke
and	water,	soul	retrieval	and	life-force	enhancement	through	rituals,	yogic	exercise	of	the
prana,	meditation	practices,	contemplation,	and	prayers.



When	we	have	a	problem,	it’s	important	to	find	the	appropriate	tools	and	methods	to	work
with	it.	Even	better	is	to	find	the	solution	to	all	problems,	which	is	to	recognize	the	nature
of	mind	and	to	abide	in	it.	But	if	we	don’t	know	the	nature	of	the	mind	or	can’t	abide	in	it,
then	we	need	to	know	other	practices	to	do.	If	we	apply	the	wrong	practice	to	a	situation,
it	will	not	be	effective.	If	we	have	energetic	problems,	 intellectual	analysis	 is	unlikely	to
help.	On	the	other	hand,	if	we	have	a	wrong	intellectual	view	or	a	wrong	attitude,	burning
incense	and	waving	feathers	probably	won’t	do	much.

In	 the	 previous	 discussion	 of	 the	 five	 pure	 lights,	 the	 process	 through	 which	 the
insubstantial	 is	 experienced	 as	 substantial	 through	 mistaken	 dualistic	 vision	 was
described.	 When	 we	 understand	 this	 process,	 we	 also	 understand	 how	 problems,
obstacles,	and	disturbances	arise.	They	begin	in	the	subtle	levels	and	move	toward	more
substantial	manifestations.	A	disease	 for	example,	may	show	up	 in	dreams	before	being
felt	 physically.	 Then	 it	 may	 manifest	 as	 an	 energetic	 change,	 fatigue,	 or	 restlessness.
Finally	it	will	reveal	itself	as	noticeable	symptoms	in	the	physical	body.

If	 the	problem	 is	 recognized	on	a	 subtler	 level,	 let’s	 say	 in	a	dream,	 it	may	be	 resolved
through	 subtle	 means:	 a	 ritual,	 practices	 done	 in	 a	 lucid	 dream,	 prayers,	 or	 directing
energies	 in	 the	 body.	 But	 if	 the	 disease	 does	 not	 enter	 awareness	 until	 it	 manifests
physically,	 then	 physical	 medicine	 or	 surgery	 may	 be	 required,	 or	 it	 may	 be	 beyond
stopping	and	death	results.

Similarly	a	disturbance	between	friends,	if	noticed	in	a	dream	or	daydream	or	picked	up
as	a	sensation	in	the	body	when	the	friends	are	together,	can	often	be	healed	with	only	a
change	of	heart.

But	as	 it	moves	 into	 increasingly	substantial	manifestation,	 it	requires	more	work,	more
talking,	more	process,	and	more	effort	to	correct.

Conceptually	 dividing	 experience	 into	 levels	 or	 dimensions	 allows	 us	 to	 work	 more
skillfully	with	particular	situations	in	our	lives,	but	of	course	experience	is	really	seamless
and	 all-at-once.	 Because	 the	 division	 of	 experience	 into	 different	 dimensions	 is	 only
conceptual,	causes,	results,	and	antidotes	have	effects	on	all	levels.	Even	in	diseases	that
are	well	advanced	physically,	subtle	treatment	like	rituals	may	be	of	benefit.	For	example,
science	has	documented	many	cases	of	strong	faith	resulting	in	the	spontaneous	remission
of	advanced	disease	processes	even	though	this	 is	baffling	 in	a	materialistic	world	view.
Similarly,	 grosser	 forms	 of	 treatment	 can	 effect	 subtle	 levels,	 as	 when	 the	 seeds	 of	 a
disease	are	positively	affected	or	negated	by	physical	yogas	or	medicines.

In	a	certain	sense,	problems	do	not	only	start	on	the	subtle	level	and	move	to	the	grosser
—they	 can	 also	 apparently	 start	 on	 the	 more	 substantial	 levels	 and	 affect	 the	 subtle.
Physical	 trauma	often	results	 in	emotional	problems.	Accidents	and	disease	can	confuse
the	mind	 and	mood.	However,	 in	 the	 Tibetan	 view,	 even	 these	 apparently	 accidental	 or
external	 causes	 of	 imbalance	 are	 thought	 to	 begin	 as	 insubstantial	 karmic	 traces	 that
finally	manifest	on	the	external	level.

PURIFICATION	AND	CULTIVATION

There	are	 tools	 to	 interrupt	or	 transform	negative	aspects	of	experience	moving	 toward
manifestation.	Purification	practices	can	be	effective.	On	the	physical	level	such	practices
can	include	dietary	restrictions,	austerities,	and	rules	of	behavior.	On	the	emotional	level
certain	 attitudes	 and	 negative	 	 emotions	 are	 renounced.	 In	 tantra	 there	 are	 many
visualizations	practices	that	purify	oneself,	other	beings,	and	all	existence.

We	can	also	cultivate	positive	aspects	of	experience.	No	one	had	to	 train	us	 to	cultivate
negative	qualities:	when	we	have	a	problem,	we	ruminate	on	it	endlessly.	Instead,	we	can
train	ourselves	to	think	positive	thoughts.	When	we	catch	ourselves	in	the	middle	of	angry
fantasies,	we	can	generate	compassionate	ones.	We	can	cultivate	 love	and	 joy,	creativity
and	stability,	the	positive	qualities	of	the	pure	elements.

For	example,	in	the	sutric	teachings	of	both	Bön	and	Buddhism	there	is	the	teaching	of	the
cultivation	of	 the	 four	 immeasurables:	 love,	compassion,	 joy,	and	equanimity.	These	 four
qualities	are	considered	particularly	 supportive	of	 the	spiritual	path.	 If	we	are	 trying	 to
cultivate	joy,	for	example,	we	first	find	the	experience	of	joy	in	ourselves.	In	those	times
when	 we	 are	 naturally	 feeling	 joy—perhaps	 when	 we	 are	 with	 people	 we	 love,	 or	 in
natural	beauty,	or	 listening	to	music—we	can	bring	that	experience	 into	awareness.	The
joy	is	not	dependent	on	those	things,	it	is	a	capacity	that	we	have	that	is	activated	when	it
meets	an	external	object	or	situation	that	supports	it.



When	 we	 know	 what	 joy	 feels	 like,	 we	 can	 clear	 a	 space	 in	 experience—which	 is
purification—and	then	feel	 joy	directly.	Once	we	know	the	experience,	we	cultivate	 it	by
supporting	it.	When	we	wake	in	the	morning,	we	can	start	the	day	by	thinking	about	our
great	 fortune	 in	 being	 human,	 having	 enough	 to	 eat,	 living	 in	 freedom,	 and	 having
encountered	the	spiritual	path.	We	can	recite	a	mantra	connected	to	the	experience	of	joy,
offer	prayers,	wear	something	that	reminds	us	to	cultivate	 joy.	We	can	cultivate	fire	and
water,	both	connected	to	joy.

We	can	cultivate	any	quality	 in	 this	way:	 love,	compassion,	courage,	stability,	comfort	 in
ourselves,	gratitude,	and	so	on.	What	we	connect	with	externally	can	support	our	internal
experiences.	Look	to	see	what	is	in	the	center	of	your	life.	What	do	you	surround	yourself
with,	 what	 books	 are	 on	 your	 shelves,	 what	 images	 on	 your	 walls,	 what	 certificates	 of
accomplishment	do	you	keep	around?

Thinking	 in	 terms	 of	 purification	 and	 cultivation	 is	 one	 of	 the	many	 ways	 we	 can	 help
balance	the	elements.

KNOWING	WHICH	ELEMENT	TO	WORK	WITH

The	practices	in	this	book	are	helpful	for	anyone	who	seriously	practices	them	whether	or
not	there	is	an	understanding	of	the	elements.	But	with	such	an	understanding	comes	the
ability	to	determine	what	is	lacking	or	dominating	and	how	to	bring	about	an	increasing
balance.

	

The	 previous	 descriptions	 of	 the	 elements	 should	 provide	 enough	 information	 and
direction	for	you	to	start	observing	elemental	traits.	With	continued	observation,	intuition
will	begin	 to	use	 the	 idea	of	 the	elements	as	a	 tool	 for	understanding	experience	and	a
new	way	of	looking	into	ourselves	and	our	lives	will	arise.	My	concern	in	this	book	is	not
with	 the	 intricate	 kinds	 of	 diagnoses	 of	 elemental	 imbalances	 that	 are	 found	 in	Tibetan
and	Chinese	medical	systems,	but	with	a	general	understanding	that	will	help	individuals
on	the	spiritual	path.

One	 way	 to	 think	 about	 long-term	 imbalance	 is	 to	 think	 about	 what	 you’ve	 wanted	 to
change	 about	 yourself	 and	 how	 you	 act	 and	 react	 in	 life.	 This	 inquiry	 usually	 leads	 to
particular	 traits	 or	 capacities	 you	 want	 to	 develop	 or	 diminish.	 What	 do	 you	 want	 to
change	in	how	you	feel	physically,	emotionally,	energetically,	mentally?	Where	do	you	run
into	problems?	Are	you	always	late?	Do	you	talk	too	much?	Too	little?	Are	you	generally
alert	 or	 dull?	 Agitated	 or	 calm?	 Are	 you	 creative?	 Comfortable	 in	 yourself?	 Are	 you
grounded?	Do	you	worry	too	much?	Are	you	responsible?	Are	you	accomplishing	what	you
want?	How	is	your	meditation	practice?	Is	there	progress	or	do	you	simply	spend	time	in	a
trance	 every	 day?	 Is	 your	 meditation	 the	 same	 as	 it	 was	 years	 ago	 or	 has	 there	 been
progress?	 Do	 you	 have	 more	 insight?	 Is	 your	 mind	 quieter	 and	 calmer?	 Are	 you	 more
peaceful?	Is	your	practice	joyful	or	is	it	a	burden?

The	answers	to	these	questions	can	be	translated	into	elemental	terms.	For	each	area	that
you	would	 like	 to	 change,	 think	 of	 the	 elemental	 quality	 that	 needs	 to	 be	 cultivated	 or
diminished.	You	will	most	 likely,	 but	not	necessarily,	 come	up	with	one	or	 two	elements
that	seem	to	dominate	your	experience	or	one	or	two	elements	that	seem	lacking.

Another	way	 to	 find	out	about	your	dominant	 traits	 is	 to	ask	your	 friends	what	element
they	think	dominates	you.	Even	if	they	don’t	know	anything	about	the	elements,	you	might
find	that	you	get	surprisingly	consistent	responses.

The	 important	 thing	 is	 to	 understand	 yourself.	 Bring	 your	 intelligence	 to	 bear	 on	 the
questions	of	your	own	life	and	apply	your	insights	to	improving	the	quality	of	your	life	and
the	effectiveness	of	your	spiritual	practice.	You	can	change	even	very	ingrained	habitual
tendencies,	 but	 you	 must	 apply	 your	 understanding	 and	 effort,	 and	 you	 must	 do	 so
intelligently.	 Life	 is	 too	 short	 to	 waste	 doing	 inappropriate	 or	 ineffective	 spiritual
practices,	and	too	short	not	to	engage	in	appropriate	and	effective	spiritual	practices.

Choose	 the	 appropriate	 practices	 described	 later	 in	 this	 book.	 If	 you	 are	 too	 scattered,
develop	 strength	 of	mind	 by	 developing	 earth.	 If	 you	 are	 too	 dull,	 develop	 air	with	 the
practices	focusing	on	prana.	If	you	worry	too	much,	diminish	the	air	quality,	and	cultivate
earth	 and	 water.	 If	 you	 are	 too	 angry,	 diminish	 fire	 and	 cultivate	 water.	 If	 you	 are
irresponsible,	diminish	water	or	space	and	cultivate	earth	and	fire.	And	so	on.



Understanding	how	to	work	with	the	elements	also	provides	tools	to	use	 in	situations	 in
which	you	are	unbalanced.	If	you	become	nervous	when	meeting	strangers,	develop	your
connection	to	earth	so	that	you	can	call	on	it	and	change	your	experience	in	the	moment.
Connect	 to	 earth,	 ground	 yourself.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 if	 you	 are	 dull	 when	with	 other
people,	develop	your	ability	 to	connect	 to	 the	qualities	of	 fire	and	air,	and	call	on	 those
when	needed.

This	kind	of	work	develops	the	quality	of	 life,	and	that	 is	good.	More	 importantly,	 it	 is	a
tool	to	support	spiritual	practice.	When	you	sit	to	meditate,	if	you	are	dull,	connect	to	the
pervasive	qualities	of	air,	 to	 the	 inspiration	of	 fire.	 If	you	are	scattered,	ground	through
the	earth	element.	If	you	are	agitated,	connect	to	the	comfort	of	water,	and	so	on.

WORKING	WITH	THE	ELEMENTS

The	practices	I	give	here	come	from	the	ancient	traditions	of	Bön	and	are	found	in	texts
that	are	centuries	old,	such	as	the	Mother	Tantra.	They	are	spiritual	practices.	They	are
not	medical	practices	 that	work	with	 inert	substances	and	disease	entities;	 they	are	not
psychological	 practices	 meant	 to	 work	 through	 our	 em	 otional	 habits;	 they	 are	 not
cognitive	practices	used	to	trick	the	mind	into	healing.	Though	they	contribute	to	physical
health,	 emotional	 stability,	 and	 cognitive	 clarity,	 they	 most	 importantly	 work	 with	 the
sacred	energies	of	existence.	Through	them	the	practitioner	is	related	to	the	sacred	and	is
sanctified.	 In	 order	 for	 the	 practices	 to	 be	 effective	 at	 this	 level,	 the	 practitioner	must
understand	that	what	is	being	dealt	with	is	alive	and	divine.

The	 understanding	 that	 the	 elements	 are	 the	 abode	 of	 innumerable	 living	 beings,
including	 divine	 goddesses	 and	 powerful	 semi-divine	 beings,	 is	 part	 of	 the	 strength	 of
shamanistic	practices.	Our	well-being	is	enhanced	when	we	learn	to	value	the	inner	life	of
ourselves	and	of	nature.

Tantra	works	with	the	principle	that	the	macrocosm	and	microcosm	reflect	each	other.	In
terms	of	the	tantric	practices	presented	in	this	book,	this	means	that	the	energies	that	are
manipulated	in	the	body	are	the	same	sacred	energies	from	which	all	creation	arises.	To
treat	these	energies	as	“my”	fire	or	“my”	water	energy	misses	an	important	purpose	of	the
practices—to	 relate	 ourselves	 to	 the	 sacred	 and	 to	 become	 sacred	 through	 that
relationship.	 Psychologizing	 the	 practices	 makes	 the	 elements	 simply	 conceptual
abstractions	used	to	manipulate	our	own	personal	psychologies	and	bodies	rather	than	to
dissolve	our	limited	identities	in	the	sacred	essence	of	all	that	is.

Although	the	three	levels	of	practice	work	with	different	dimensions	of	experience,	in	the
life	 of	 the	 practitioner	 they	 usually	 intertwine.	 Some	 tantric	 practitioners	 perform
shamanistic	 rituals	 and	 practice	 Dzogchen,	 and	 Dzogchen	 students	 practice	 tantra	 and
make	 offerings	 to	 the	 guardians.	 It	 is	 harder	 for	 the	 practitioners	 of	 lower	 practices	 to
incorporate	higher	practices,	but	it	should	be	no	problem	for	those	who	work	with	higher
practices	to	incorporate	the	lower.	In	any	case,	it	is	helpful	to	separate	these	levels	for	the
purposes	of	learning,	so	that	the	differences	are	understood	and	so	that	the	practitioner	is
not	confused	about	the	view,	the	methods,	and	the	goals	in	each	level	of	practice.

All	 of	 the	 levels	 work	 with	 symbols	 and	 concepts	 connected	 to	 the	 elemental	 energies
because	symbols	are	how	we	relate	to	energetic	processes.	Imagine	that	in	a	dream	you
are	 bitten	 by	 a	 poisonous	 animal.	 Symbolically	 that	 can	 mean	 a	 lot	 of	 things	 and	 the
individual	who	has	the	dream	is	in	the	best	position	to	know	what	the	meaning	is.	But	let’s
say	that	in	general	it	means	there	is	something	negative,	poisonous,	in	you	or	threatening
you.	The	shamanistic	practitioner	might	do	a	ritual	invoking	the	spirits	that	have	injected
the	 poison	 into	 the	 dreamer,	 and	 then	 make	 offerings	 to	 those	 spirits	 or	 use	 ritual	 to
overpower	 them	in	order	 to	have	 the	poison	removed.	The	 tantric	practitioner,	 too,	may
use	rituals,	but	he	or	she	may	also	work	directly	with	 the	energies	of	 the	body	 through
yogic	 practices	 of	 the	 prana	 and	 channels	 or	 work	 with	 the	 yidam	 in	 deity	 yoga.
Alternatively,	 the	 tantric	 practitioner	 may	 see	 all	 phenomena	 as	 illusory	 and	 not	 be
bothered	by	such	a	dream.	The	accomplished	Dzogchen	practitioner,	abiding	in	non-dual
awareness,	will	not	be	concerned	with	the	meaning	of	the	dream.	He	or	she	is	no	longer
interpreting	experience.	But	most	Dzogchen	practitioners	are	not	so	firmly	established	in
the	 nature	 of	 mind	 and	 they,	 too,	 must	 deal	 with	 relative	 situations	 and	 their
consequences.	 Traditionally	 they	 use	 either	 shamanistic	 or	 tantric	 practices	 to	 address
this	kind	of	situation.

CHOOSING	THE	LEVEL	OF	THE	PRACTICE



Whether	 or	 not	 meditation	 and	 spiritual	 practices	 are	 powerful	 depends	 on	 the
practitioner	more	 than	 the	 form	 of	 the	 practice.	 There	 is	 little	 benefit	 if	 they	 are	 done
without	a	correct	understanding	of	how	to	practice	and	what	the	practice	is	supposed	to
accomplish.	The	practitioner	 can	engage	 in	 a	 fantasy	of	 spiritual	 pr	ogress	 but	 genuine
spiritual	 development	 may	 be	 lacking.	 For	 example,	 when	 we	 are	 weak,	 energetically
disturbed,	depressed,	or	holding	tightly	to	a	fragile	identity,	we	are	easier	prey	to	negative
external	 influences	and	 to	 internal	confusions.	At	 such	a	 time,	believing	ourselves	 to	be
practicing	a	very	high	practice	like	Dzogchen	may	not	be	very	helpful.	If	we	claim	to	be
practicing	a	high	practice	but	there	is	no	positive	effect,	we	are	only	deceiving	ourselves.
The	highest	practice	for	an	individual	is	the	practice	that	is	most	effective,	whatever	it	is
called.

No	 one	 can	 really	 tell	 you	which	 practice	 you	 should	 do	 at	 a	 particular	 time.	 You	must
come	to	understand	the	practices,	how	they	are	meant	to	work	and	within	what	situations,
and	 then	be	relentlessly	honest	with	yourself	about	your	own	present	capacity.	Be	clear
with	yourself.	Don’t	idealize.	Find	the	right	teacher.	Study.	And	then	make	a	decision.	It’s
not	 a	question	of	which	practice	 is	better	 in	 an	abstract	 sense,	 it’s	 a	question	of	which
practice	you	need.	 If	you	are	dishonest	with	yourself	or	do	not	 investigate	 the	practices
that	 you	do,	 you	may	 lose	many	years,	 even	a	 lifetime,	doing	practices	with	 little	 or	no
result.

In	 the	 West	 everyone	 wants	 the	 “highest”	 practice,	 a	 wish	 that	 indicates	 a
misunderstanding	of	the	path.	Everyone	wants	to	hurry	through	the	foundational	practices
(ngön	 dro).	 But	 great	 masters	 do	 these	 practices	 all	 their	 lives.	 They	 continue	 to
contemplate	 impermanence,	 cultivate	 compassion,	 do	 purification	 practices,	 make
offerings,	and	do	Guru	Yoga.	It	is	not	a	stage	to	get	over.	The	most	accomplished	masters
and	 teachers	 do	 these	practices	 and	 cultivate	 these	qualities	 all	 the	way	 to	 the	highest
stages	of	realization,	because	there	is	still	benefit	in	doing	them.

The	ground	of	individual	existence	is	empty	awareness.	This	may	not	sound	very	inviting.
Emptiness	is	usually	considered	to	be	undesirable:	an	empty	feeling	or	an	empty	life	or	an
empty	 head	 or	 an	 empty	 heart	 are	 considered	 negative.	 So	 we’ve	 been	 filling	 this
emptiness	since	time	without	beginning.	We	make	up	identities	and	things	and	stories,	but
because	we	are	mistaken	about	what	all	these	really	are,	they	never	quite	satisfy.

Shamanic	 practice	 is	 creating	 order	 in	what	 fills	 the	 space,	 learning	 to	 exercise	 power
over	 what	 arises	 and	 what	 may	 interfere	 with	 us,	 and	 learning	 to	 find	 support	 in	 the
environment.	 The	 shaman	 does	 not	 care	 so	much	 about	 abstract	 philosophy.	He	 or	 she
instead	learns	how	to	connect	to,	manipulate,	and	defend	against	forces.

Sutric	 practice	 is	 based	 on	 renunciation,	 on	 getting	 tired	 of	 much	 of	 what	 has	 been
accumulated	 in	 space.	 Practitioners	 try	 to	 throw	 out	 the	 negative,	 get	 rid	 of	 the	 self-
centeredness	 that’s	 caused	 them	 so	 much	 pain.	 And	 they	 try	 to	 finish	 with	 the	 greed,
anger,	 and	 delusion	 that’s	 kept	 them	 in	 misery	 for	 so	 long	 and	 just	 keep	 the	 love,
compassion,	faith,	equanimity,	peace,	and	wisdom.

The	 tantric	practitioner	doesn’t	 throw	anything	out.	 Instead,	he	or	 she	 takes	what	 is	 at
hand	and	turns	it	into	beauty,	into	sacred	ornaments	that	adorn	the	empty	space.	Ordinary
deluded	 beings	 are	 transformed	 into	 buddhas.	 Sounds	 are	 transformed	 into	 sacred
mantras.	 Sensation	 turns	 to	 bliss.	 The	 practitioner	 trades	 in	 a	 small,	 confined,	 scared,
unhappy,	anxious	identity	for	an	expansive,	unlimited,	grounded,	joyful,	peaceful	identity.

The	Great	Perfection	practitioner	lives	in	pure	empty	space,	and	appreciates	it.	He	or	she
lets	go	of	everything,	even	the	sense	of	self,	and	it	all	dissolves	into	the	limitless	base,	the
kunzhi,	from	which	all	phenomena	arise	as	pure	light	and	pure	experience.	Everything	is
empty	and	emptiness	is	enough.	It’s	very	spacious	and	luminous.

So	which	practice	should	you	do?	The	one	that	seems	appropriate	in	the	moment.	The	one
you’ve	 connected	with,	 understood,	 practiced,	 applied.	 If	 you	 cannot	 resolve	 everything
with	 one	practice,	 then	use	 other	 practices.	Experiment	with	 the	practices	 in	 this	 book
until	you	know	how	to	work	with	them	and	know	how	they	affect	you,	and	realize	that	the
longer	you	work	with	any	practice	the	more	profound	its	effects	will	be.	Learn	what	works
and	what	you	need.	The	spiritual	path	 isn’t	a	passive	 journey;	youdon’t	 just	 follow	what
someone	says.	You	have	 to	 investigate,	 inquire,	experiment.	You	have	 to	 invest	yourself,
your	time,	and	your	life	in	the	path.	Then	you	will	find	that	the	path	reveals	itself	to	you.
You	can	follow	it,	but	in	following	it	you	must	also	discover	it.



TWO

THE	FIVE	ELEMENTS	IN
SHAMANISM

Many	Westerners	 talk	about	Tibetan	shamanism	but,	as	 I	mentioned	earlier,	 there	 is	no
such	term	in	Tibetan.	Instead,	the	Bön	tradition	talks	about	the	“causal	vehicles,”	the	first
four	of	 the	nine	 levels	of	B	ön	 teachings	 in	 the	Southern	Treasure	 tradition.	These	 four
collections	 of	 teachings	 and	 practices	 are	 called:	 Chashen	 (The	 Way	 of	 the	 Shen	 of
Prediction),	Nangshen	(The	Way	of	the	Shen	of	the	Visible	World),	Trulshen	(The	Way	of
the	Shen	of	Magical	Illusion),	and	Srishen	(The	Way	of	the	Shen	of	Existence).

Chashen,	the	first	way,	teaches	the	practices	of	medical	diagnosis,	healing,	divination,	the
astrology	 of	 prediction,	 and	 the	 astrology	 of	 diagnosis.	 The	 second	 way,	 Nangshen,
includes	teachings	and	practices	related	to	purification	rituals,	rituals	to	summon	energy
and	to	enhance	prosperity	and	well-being,	rituals	to	suppress	or	liberate	negative	forces
and	 to	 invoke	 and	 make	 offerings	 to	 deities,	 and	 rituals	 to	 free	 those	 possessed	 or
attacked	by	demonic	spirits.	Practitioners	of	the	third	way,	Trulshen,	travel	to	wild	places
and	 perform	 practices	 to	 subjugate	 demons	 and	 spirits	 that	 live	 there.	 The	 conquered
spirits	are	bound	by	vows	 to	protect	 the	spiritual	 teachings	and	 the	practitioners	of	 the
teachings.	Srishen,	the	fourth	way,	works	with	the	spirits	of	the	living	and	the	dead.	For
the	living,	rituals	are	performed	to	recover	lost	or	damaged	life	force	or	soul	qualities,	as
will	be	explained	in	greater	detail	below.	For	the	dead,	rites	are	performed	to	free	them
from	negative	 influences	and	 to	guide	and	support	 them	through	experiences	 they	have
between	this	life	and	the	next.

I	 use	 the	 word	 shamanic	 to	 refer	 to	 practices	 meant	 to	 harmonize	 the	 relationship
between	 the	 individual	 and	 the	 environment	 through	working	 with	 non-physical	 beings
and	 the	 sacred	energies	underlying	nature.	Generally,	 shamanism	deals	with	 forces	and
entities	understood	as	being	external	to	the	practitioner.	Practitioners	work	with	the	raw
natural	 elements	 and	 their	 energy,	 and	 they	 also	 work	 with	 spirits,	 deities,	 healing
goddesses,	ancestral	spirits,	and	other	non-physical	beings.

The	 shamanic	 vehicles	 are	 not	 primarily	 concerned	 with	 enlightenment	 but	 with	 the
removal	of	obstacles	in	life,	the	enhancement	of	positive	qualities,	and	the	lessening	of	the
suffering	we	experience	through	interaction	with	external	forces.	They	are	known	as	the
“causal	vehicles”	because	they	create	the	causes	and	foundations	for	participation	in	the
“resultant	vehicles”—sutra,	tantra	and	Dzogchen.

In	Western	countries	there	sometimes	seems	to	be	a	division	between	students	interested
in	 shamanism	 and	 those	 interested	 in	 Great	 Perfection	 and	 other	 non-dual	 teachings.
There	may	be	a	number	of	reasons	this	 is	so.	Some	people	are	sensitive	 to	non-physical
entities	 and	 forces	 and	 naturally	 feel	 an	 affinity	 for	 teachings	 that	 address	 experiences
with	which	they	are	already	familiar.	On	the	other	hand,	some	Westerners,	educated	in	the
materialism	 of	 secular	 Western	 culture,	 assume	 these	 teachings	 are	 only	 superstition,
something	they	must	go	through	in	order	to	reach	the	higher	teachings	in	which	they	are
interested.

However,	shamanic	practices	can	help	tantric	and	Dzogchen	practitioners	remove	or	heal
the	causes	of	much	suffering	and	remove	or	overcome	obstructions	to	spiritual	practice.
For	example,	I	know	a	very	scholarly	monk	concerned	almost	exclusively	with	philosophy
and	academic	studies.	When	he	was	ill,	he	went	to	his	kitchen	and	prepared	an	offering	to
the	spirits	he	thought	were	responsible	for	causing	the	illness.	This	is	natural	in	Tibetan
culture;	 for	 us	 there	 is	 no	 conflict	 between	 the	 philosophical,	 the	 spiritual,	 and	 the
shamanic,	 and	 shamanic	practices	 are	 incorporated	 into	 the	other	 levels	 of	 teachings.	 I
think	 this	 blending	 of	 shamanism	with	 the	 higher	 views	 of	 sutra,	 tantra,	 and	Dzogchen
may	be	unique	to	Tibetan	culture.

In	Bön,	the	shamanic	practitioner	works	mostly	with	external	symbols	and	with	symbolic
acts	of	ritual.	The	symbol	connects	the	focused	mind	of	the	practitioner	with	the	aspect	of
experience	the	symbol	represents,	whether	a	force	or	an	entity.	For	instance,	when	a	food
offering	is	made	to	spirits	or	deities,	it	is	often	placed	outside.	Eventually	birds,	insects,	or
animals	eat	 it.	This	doesn’t	negate	the	offering.	On	the	energetic	 level,	 the	symbols	and
symbolic	 actions	 have	made	 a	 connection:	 something	has	 been	 offered	 from	 the	 human



side	and	something	has	been	received	on	the	spirit	side.	Energy	is	manipulated	through
symbols,	 and	 the	 forces	 and	 beings	 affected	will	 be	 known	 to	 the	 practitioner	with	 the
capacity	to	perceive	them.

If	an	 illness	begins	 to	manifest	or	 if	negative	emotions	begin	 to	dominate	experience,	a
shamanic	practitioner	might	perform	a	ritual	that	includes	working	with	spirits	thought	to
cause	 the	disease	 or	 be	 capable	 of	 influencing	 its	 course.	Herbs	particularly	 associated
with	 elemental	 energies	may	 be	 taken	 internally,	 steeped	 as	 tea,	 or	 burned	 so	 that	 the
smoke	 may	 be	 inhaled.	 Energies	 may	 be	 collected	 shamanically	 from	 their	 raw
manifestations:	earth	energy	from	a	mountain	or	earth	spirit,	for	example,	or	the	energy
of	fire	directly	from	sources	of	heat	or	from	fire	spirits.	A	shamanic	healer	uses	many	such
methods	 to	 benefit	 others	 who	 are	 suffering	 from	 physical,	 emotional,	 or	 mental
discomfort	or	illness.

Because	 all	 things	 are	 interrelated,	 one	 can	 read	 signs	 and	 portents.	 Omens	 are
meaningful	not	because	 they	have	been	arranged	 for	an	 individual	by	 larger	 forces,	but
because	 everything	 influences	 everything	 else.	 Thus,	 for	 someone	 with	 the	 proper
sensitivity,	 the	world	becomes	a	book	 in	which	all	meaning	can	be	read.	Dreams	can	be
read,	as	can	cards,	thrown	stones,	cloud	formations,	the	sounds	of	water,	the	conditions	of
the	 weather,	 and	 the	 movements	 of	 animals.	 Spirits	 communicate	 through	 signs	 and
symbols	 encountered	 in	 daily	 life.	 In	 the	 shamanic	 consciousness	 there	 are	 no
meaningless	coincidences;	everything	has	meaning	and	the	skilled	practitioner	can	draw
out	particular	meanings	 from	the	 infinitely	complex	relationships	that	connect	all	 things
and	beings.

Awareness	of	signs	and	portents	is	found	in	every	culture.	However	the	use	of	signs	often
becomes	 mere	 superstition	 when	 the	 connection	 to	 the	 original	 meaning	 is	 lost.	 For
example,	in	the	United	States	it	 is	considered	inauspicious	for	a	black	cat	to	cross	one’s
path.	Though	this	kind	of	thing	is	mostly	joked	about,	many	people	still	feel	uneasy	when
they	walk	 under	 a	 leaning	 ladder.	Other	 cultures	 believe	 that	 it	 is	 inauspicious	when	 a
snake	crosses	the	path	in	a	downward	direction	or	when	an	owl	is	heard	laughing	in	the
early	morning.	 Perhaps	 individuals	 in	most	 cultures	would	 consider	 a	 dream	of	 the	 sun
falling	 to	 the	 earth,	 of	 a	 loss	 of	 light,	 to	 be	 negative,	 whereas	 dreams	 of	 sunrise	 or
blooming	flowers	are	considered	auspicious.

In	Tibetan	culture,	when	an	inauspicious	sign	is	encountered,	there	are	remedies	meant	to
protect	the	positive	qualities	that	are	threatened	or	to	retrieve	them	when	they	are	lost.
For	 example,	 when	 a	 negative	 omen	 is	 seen,	 people	might	 imagine	 their	 right	 and	 left
hands	as	the	sun	and	moon	discs.	They	imagine	the	solar	and	lunar	powers	and	energies,
visualize	 this	with	 the	mind,	 try	 to	 feel	 the	energy	of	 it	 in	 the	body,	and	 then	clap	 their
hands	 together.	 They	 say,	 “For	 what	 threatened	 me	 in	 the	 bad	 dream”—clap!	 Or,	 “I
disperse	the	negative	forces	represented	by	these	symbols	(the	signs	or	dreams)”—clap!
The	loud	clap	is	meant	to	drive	away	the	negative	forces.

I	think	this	process	is	similar	to	what	Catholics	do	when	they	make	the	sign	of	the	cross
upon	 encountering	 something	 negative	 or	 frightening.	 Other	 cultures	 have	 their	 own
symbols	and	actions.	Even	people	who	believe	all	 this	 to	be	groundless	superstition	 feel
something	 when	 encountering	 certain	 signs	 or	 a	 series	 of	 negative	 images	 or	 events.
There	is	a	discomfort,	things	feel	out	of	order,	or	there	is	a	feeling	of	negative	oppression.
In	 secular	 cultures	 the	 discomfort	may	 be	 blamed	 on	 a	 bad	 dinner	 or	 the	 first	 signs	 of
illness—something	acceptable.	But	doing	this	doesn’t	offer	much	in	the	way	of	a	response
to	 the	 situation.	 The	 shamanic	 practices	 provide	 tools	 that	 can	 energetically	 balance	 a
situation	 and	 restore	 harmony	 to	 the	 relationship	 between	 the	 individual	 and	 the
environment.

LA,	YEE,	AND	SEM

In	the	shamanic	vehicles	there	are	various	ways	to	think	about	health	and	well	being,	all
based	 on	 an	 understanding	 of	 the	 elements.	 As	 I	 stated	 earlier,	 the	more	 balanced	 the
elements,	the	greater	the	health,	and	the	less	balanced,	the	worse	the	health.	This	is	true
on	 every	 level:	 physical,	 emotional,	 psychological,	 energetic,	 and	 spiritual.	 Some	 texts
write	 of	 this	 in	 terms	 of	 the	 la	 (bla),	 yee	 (y	 id),	 and	 sem	 (sems).	 There	 are	 no	 exact
translations	 into	English	of	 these	 terms.	Also,	 these	words	may	have	different	meanings
depending	on	 the	 level	of	 the	 teachings.	 In	Dzogchen	 texts,	 for	 instance,	 sem	 (or	mind)
includes	what	in	the	causal	vehicles	is	separated	into	sem	and	yee.	Please	note	that	terms
here	relate	to	the	shamanic	vehicles	and	that	the	same	terms	are	explained	differently	in
different	contexts.



La	is	usually	translated	as	“soul”	but,	more	accurately,	the	la	is	the	depth	of	who	we	are.
On	the	deepest	level,	it	is	the	balance	of	the	five	pure	lights,	the	pure	elemental	energies.
On	 the	 level	 of	 ordinary	 life,	 the	 la	 is	 the	 capacity	 to	 experience	 the	 five	 elemental
qualities:	groundedness,	comfort,	inspiration,	flexibility,	and	accommodation.

The	 la	 is	 associated	with	 the	karmic	 traces	 that	make	us	human	 rather	 than	 something
else,	such	as	a	turtle	or	a	god.	Our	la	is	a	human	la.	The	la	of	a	tiger	is	a	tiger	la.	The	la
determines	which	kind	of	being	we	will	be	as	well	as	much	of	our	individual	identity	and
capacity.

The	 la	 underlies	 our	 vitality,	 our	 inner	 strength	 as	 an	 individual.	 It	 can	 be	 damaged	 or
enhanced,	 stolen	 and	 retrieved.	 If	 we	 are	 humiliated,	 it	 is	 weakened.	 If	 we	 succeed	 in
what	is	important	to	us,	it	is	strengthened.	If	we	act	with	integrity	it	is	made	stronger.	If
we	betray	ourselves,	it	loses	vigor.

I	often	translate	la	as	“basic	human	goodness”	because	the	la	is	the	basis	of	our	capacity
for	positive	qualities.	We	are	born	with	the	capacity	to	trust	our	mothers,	to	develop	love
and	connection,	 to	be	kind.	This	 is	basic	human	goodness:	basic	 love,	basic	 trust,	basic
connection,	and	so	on.	Basic	human	goodness	can	be	developed	through	moral,	spiritual,
and	religious	traditions	and	guidance,	but	it	is	innate.	As	it	is	developed,	the	la	becomes
stronger	and	can	be	healed	if	need	be.

We	 will	 always	 encounter	 conditions	 and	 events	 that	 disturb	 the	 la:	 family	 problems,
political	oppression,	illness,	accidents.	Non-physical	entities	can	also	negatively	affect	us.
Whatever	 the	 source,	 if	 the	 la	 is	 hurt–by	 any	 of	 these	 things–and	 there	 isn’t	 enough
strength	to	overcome	that	hurt,	basic	human	goodness	can	be	damaged.	The	capacities	to
trust,	 love,	give,	and	receive	can	be	constricted.	That’s	how	damage	 to	 the	 la	manifests
psychologically.	 It	can	also	manifest	physically	and	energetically.	The	positive	aspects	of
the	elemental	qualities	can	be	lost.

In	Tibetan	astrology	it	is	said	that	la	is	the	mother	of	the	life-force;	if	the	la	is	damaged,
the	life-force	is	diminished.	Damage	to	the	la	can	occur	slowly,	over	a	long	period	of	time,
or	all	at	once.	After	an	accident,	for	example,	there	can	be	long-lasting	damage:	fear	that
won’t	subside,	a	negative	change	in	perspective,	and	so	on.	We	call	this	kind	of	damage	or
disturbance	in	the	basic	human	goodness	“soul	loss.”

While	 the	 la	 determines	 the	 qualities	 and	 capacities	 of	 the	 individual,	 the	 yee	 is	 the
movement	of	experience	shaped	by	 the	 la.	The	 la	 is	 the	capacity	 to	 feel	 joy	or	 sadness,
trust	or	mistrust;	the	yee	is	what	actually	feels	joy	or	sadness,	trust	or	mistrust.	The	yee	is
the	reflective	aspect	of	the	mind	in	which	the	capacities	and	qualities	contained	in	the	la
arise	in	experience.

The	sem	 is	 the	active,	 conceptual	mind.	 It	has	 the	capacity	 to	understand,	 judge,	know,
and	decide.	How	well	it	does	this	is	affected	by	the	condition	of	the	la	and	the	yee.

The	condition	of	the	la	manifests	as	the	capacities	and	qualities	of	the	individual’s	mind.
When	the	la	is	balanced,	the	images	and	thoughts	that	manifest	in	the	mind	are	similarly
healthy	and	balanced.	When	the	la	is	damaged,	the	thoughts	and	images	in	the	mind	are
correspondingly	negative	and	unhealthy.

The	three—la,	yee,	and	sem—cannot	be	separated.	They	must	be	considered	together	 in
shamanic	practice	because	the	health	of	one	is	dependent	on	the	health	of	all	three,	and
the	health	of	all	three	is	related	to	the	balance	of	the	elements.

LA,	SOK,	AND	TSE

Another	threefold	set	of	terms	is	also	used	in	the	causal	vehicles	to	talk	about	the	health
of	 the	 individual:	 la,	 sok	 (srog),	 and	 tse	 (tshe).	 The	 la	 I	 have	 already	 explained	 as	 the
karmic	capacity	for	basic	positive	human	qualities.	Tse	(or	life-span)	is	the	potential	length
of	our	life.	We	think	about	this	as	something	that	can	be	damaged	or	enhanced.	Sok,	the
life-force,	is	vitality	and	is	closely	related	to	the	i	nnate	awareness,	rigpa.	Like	rigpa,	the
life-force	is	boundless	and	without	identity,	rather	than	personal.	Unlike	rigpa,	we	can	lose
life-force	or	accumulate	it.	When	we	feel	aversion	to	experience,	our	life-force	is	lessened.
When	 we	 see	 beauty,	 in	 even	 the	 worst	 situation,	 our	 life-force	 is	 enhanced.	 Relative
beauty	can	enliven	the	intellect	and	open	us	somewhat,	but	seeing	the	beauty	of	the	purity
of	being	feeds	the	life-force	on	a	deeper	level.

Sincere	prayer,	a	pure	emotional	expression,	 increases	 life-force.	Sensual	experiences	of



color	and	the	beauty	of	nature	as	well	as	appreciation	of	experience	feed	the	life-force.	If
you	don’t	 currently	 feel	 an	appreciation	of	 life,	use	your	mind	 to	generate	 it:	 “This	 is	 a
nice	hotel,	a	beautiful	 tree,	a	good	person,”	and	so	on.	Life-force	can	be	retrieved	 from
any	dimension	by	opening,	 accepting,	 and	appreciating.	People	with	partners	 they	 love,
even	with	pets	they	love,	live	longer	and	heal	faster	than	people	alone.	Where	there	is	love
there	is	connection	and	appreciation.	Through	connection	the	energy	of	the	earth	element
is	strengthened	and	it	strengthens	the	life-force.

Because	 the	 relationship	 with	 nature—the	 raw	 elements	 and	 the	 beauty	 of	 the	 natural
world–is	so	important,	it’s	good	to	make	it	a	practice	to	bring	mindful	appreciation	to	the
earth,	 air,	 sky,	 heat,	 and	 water.	 Positively	 connecting	 to	 spirits	 associated	 with	 the
elements	can	also	enhance	the	life-force.

PRACTICES

The	 shamanic	 vehicles	 contain	 a	 large	 number	 of	 practices	 that	 include	 meditations,
visualizations,	mantras,	and	prayers.	There	are	numerous	rituals	of	ransom,	soul	retrieval,
cultivation	of	 life-force,	 longevity,	healing,	purification,	 invocation,	and	protection.	Some
practices	are	very	simple,	some	are	very	complex.	Here	I	focus	on	only	two	practices.	The
first	involves	working	with	the	raw	natural	elements	for	support	and	healing.	The	second
is	a		practice	 that	calls	upon	the	 five	elemental	goddesses	to	aid	us	 in	retrieving	 lost	or
damaged	energies.	In	Tibetan	it	is	called	“retrieving	the	elemental	essences”	(‘byung	ba’i
bcud	‘dus).	I	have	also	included	information	on	making	offerings.

The	Element	Goddess:	Dekche	Drolma

WORKING	WITH	THE	ELEMENTS	IN	NATURE

Working	 with	 the	 raw	 natural	 elements	 is	 a	 process	 of	 connecting	 with	 the	 external
elements	and	internalizing	their	qualities.	Doing	this	ultimately	 leads	to	connection	with
the	essence	of	the	elements	which,	in	the	shamanic	path,	is	considered	part	of	the	soul.	At
this	 level,	 connecting	 is	 healing.	 The	 internalization	 of	 elemental	 energies	 helps	 us	 to
cultivate	positive	qualities	and	eliminate	negative	ones.

	

We	 are	 affected	when	we	go	where	 the	 land	 is	 in	 its	 natural	 state:	 deserts,	mountains,
jungles,	and	open	plains.	What	affects	us	is	not	only	the	physical	beauty	that	we	see	with
our	 eyes.	 Rather,	 the	 whole	 body	 responds.	 These	 deeper	 responses	 are	 often
unconscious,	 but	 with	 practice	 we	 can	 learn	 to	 internalize	 the	 energies	 of	 the	 natural
elements	 for	healing	and	regeneration.	Even	when	we	are	not	 in	the	wilds	of	nature	we
are	always	in	contact	with	the	elements.	Therefore	these	practices	are	always	available.

When	we	take	a	hot	bath	or	shower	and	feel	the	relaxation	and	comfort	of	the	warm	water,
we	 can	 bring	 the	 comfort	 inside	 and	 feel	 it	 throughout	 our	 bodies.	 We	 can	 imagine
bringing	 in	 the	 qualities	 with	 our	 breath.	 Then	 we	 can	 feel	 it	 in	 the	 more	 subtle
dimensions	of	our	experience,	such	as	in	the	central	channel	and	the	heart	center.	We	can
let	 the	 comfort	 of	 water	 pervade	 us	 and	 the	 space	 around	 us	 and	 eventually	 all	 other



beings	and	all	places.	Absorbing	positive	qualities	and	then	radiating	them	to	all	beings	is
a	practice	that	is	common	in	tantra.

This	pattern	is	used	again	and	again	in	practice	with	the	elements.	We	can	practice	with
everyday	experiences—the	warmth	of	the	sun,	for	example.	When	you	feel	the	warmth	of
the	 sun	 on	 your	 skin,	 relax	 and	 take	 it	 in	 to	 the	 deepest	 parts	 of	 yourself.	 Use	 your
imagination.	 Feel	 the	 warmth	 stream	 through	 the	 channels	 of	 your	 body	 and	 into	 the
central	channel.	Then	feel	it	collect	in	the	center	of	the	central	channel,	the	region	of	your
heart.	Let	it	in	even	deeper,	into	your	soul.	Immerse	yourself	in	that,	feeling	the	warmth	of
your	 body,	 channels,	 chakras,	 central	 channel,	 heart,	 and	 soul.	 Let	 the	 sunlight	 be	 the
external	 phenomena	 that	 evokes	 the	 healing	 qualities	 of	 the	 fire	 element,	 which	 are
always	in	you.	The	most	essential	level	of	the	sun’s	energy	is	the	most	subtle	level	of	fire
and	as	you	develop	your	practice	you	can	use	imagination	and	visualization	to	bring	this
energy	into	the	most	intimate	dimensions	of	your	being.

Ultimately	 we	 can	 merge	 with	 the	 element.	 We	 connect	 the	 external	 quality	 with	 the
internal	quality	and	 then	dissolve	 the	distinctions.	Reaching	out	 is	 reaching	 in	when	we
have	developed	practices	that	connect	 the	two.	Otherwise,	reaching	out	 is	 just	reaching
out	and	going	away	from	ourselves.

In	order	to	do	the	practice	described	below	it	is	helpful	to	go	to	an	area	where	the	natural
elements	 are	 strong.	 A	 good	 time	 to	 practice	 is	 when	 you	 are	 staying	 at	 the	 beach,
walking	in	the	mountains,	sitting	in	the	sun	or	in	front	of	a	fire,	standing	on	the	ridge	of	a
hill,	feeling	the	wind	blow—or	anytime	you	become	aware	of	the	presence	of	one	or	more
of	 the	elements.	Connecting	with	awareness	 to	strong	manifestations	of	 the	elements	 in
nature	supports	the	development	of	those	elements	internally.

There	 are	 traditional	 signs	 of	 success	 in	 this	 practice	 as	 in	 all	 the	 practices	 with	 the
elements,	 but	 the	 most	 important	 sign	 is	 the	 appearance	 of	 positive	 changes	 in	 a	 life.
What	was	internally	weak	becomes	stronger,	while	negative	qualities	that	once	dominated
experience	begin	to	diminish.	Watch	for	these	changes	to	gauge	the	extent	to	which	you
are	integrating	your	everyday	life	with	the	practices.

The	practice	 is	most	 effective	when	 time,	 attitude,	 form	of	 the	element,	mantra,	 sacred
images,	 and	 imagination	 are	 used	 together	 harmoniously.	 Try	 to	 remain	 focused	 on	 the
experience	of	the	practice,	keeping	the	awareness	fresh	and	clear.	Sessions	can	be	of	any
length,	 but	 try	 to	 do	 them	 for	 at	 least	 a	 half	 hour	 or	 forty-five	 minutes	 to	 develop	 a
stronger	 experience.	 You	 can	 be	 alone	 or	 with	 another	 person.	 Before	 beginning	 any
practice,	including	this	one,	it	is	helpful	to	purify	and	open	the	channels	of	the	body	using
the	practice	of	the	Nine	Purification	Breaths.

The	Nine	Purification	Breaths

The	Nine	Purification	Breaths	is	a	short	practice	designed	to	open	and	clear	the	channels
and	relax	the	mind	and	body.	It	is	good	to	do	before	any	meditation	practice	and	can	also
be	done	in	the	morning	upon	waking	and	in	the	evening	prior	to	sleep.

Sit	 in	a	cross-legged	meditation	posture.	Place	your	hands	palm	up	in	your	lap,	with	the
left	hand	resting	on	the	right.	Tuck	your	chi	n	under	just	a	little	to	straighten	the	back	of
the	neck.	Keep	the	back	straight	but	not	rigid,	the	chest	open.	The	eyes	can	be	closed	or
open.

Visualize	the	three	primary	channels.	The	central	channel	begins	in	the	center	of	the	body,
four	finger-widths	below	the	navel.	It	rises	straight	up	the	center	of	the	body.	It	is	the	size
of	a	thick	fountain	pen	and	widens	slightly	from	the	heart	to	its	opening	at	the	crown	of
the	head.	The	side	channels	are	the	diameter	of	pencils	and	join	the	central	channel	at	its
base	below	 the	navel.	 They	 rise	 straight	 through	 the	body	 on	 either	 side	 of	 the	 central
channel,	 curve	under	 the	skull,	pass	down	behind	 the	eyes,	and	open	at	 the	nostrils.	 In
women	the	right	channel	is	red	and	the	left	is	white.	In	men	the	right	channel	is	white	and
the	left	is	red.	The	central	channel	is	blue	in	both	men	and	women.

First	Three	Breaths

Men:	Raise	the	right	hand	with	the	thumb	pressing	the	base	of	the	ring	finger.	Closing	the
right	nostril	with	the	ring	finger,	inhale	green	light	through	the	left	nostril.	Then,	closing
the	 left	 nostril	 with	 the	 right	 ring	 finger,	 exhale	 completely	 through	 the	 right	 nostril.
Repeat	this	for	three	inhalations	and	exhalations.



Women:	Raise	the	left	hand	with	the	thumb	pressing	the	base	of	the	ring	finger.	Closing
the	left	nostril	with	the	left	ring	finger,	inhale	green	light	through	the	right	nostril.	Then,
closing	the	right	nostril	with	the	left	ring	finger,	exhale	completely	through	the	left	nostril.
Repeat	this	for	three	inhalations	and	exhalations.

With	each	exhalation,	imagine	all	obstacles	linked	with	male	potencies	expelled	from	the
white	 channel	 in	 the	 form	 of	 light	 blue	 air.	 These	 include	 illnesses	 associated	with	 the
winds	as	well	as	obstacles	and	obscurations	connected	with	the	past.

Second	Three	Breaths

Men	 and	 Women:	 Change	 hands	 and	 nostrils	 and	 repeat	 for	 three	 inhalations	 and
exhalations.	 With	 each	 exhalation,	 imagine	 all	 obstacles	 linked	 with	 female	 potencies
expelled	 from	 the	 red	 channel	 in	 the	 form	 of	 light	 pink	 air.	 These	 include	 illnesses
associated	with	bile	as	well	as	obstacles	and	obscurations	associated	with	the	future.

Third	Three	Breaths

Men	and	Women:	Place	the	left	hand	on	top	of	the	right	in	the	lap,	palms	up.	Inhale	green
healing	 light	 through	 both	 nostrils.	 Visualize	 it	 moving	 down	 the	 side	 channels	 to	 the
juncture	with	the	main	channel,	four	finger-widths	below	the	navel.	With	the	exhalation,
visualize	the	energy	rising	up	the	central	channel	and	out	the	top	of	the	head.	Complete
three	inhalations	and	exhalations.	With	each	exhalation,	imagine	all	potencies	for	illnesses
associated	 with	 hostile	 spirits	 expelled	 from	 the	 top	 of	 the	 head	 in	 the	 form	 of	 black
smoke.	 Also	 expel	 illnesses	 associated	 with	 phlegm	 and	 any	 other	 obstacles	 and
obscurations	associated	with	the	present.

Earth

Go	to	a	natural	setting	where	there	is	a	strong	sense	of	the	qualities	of	earth	and	sit	on
the	ground.	 If	you	are	sensitive	to	these	kinds	of	energies,	or	would	 like	to	develop	this
sensitivity,	walk	around	and	try	to	find	the	place	with	the	strongest	earth	energy.	Don’t	get
neurotic	 about	 it—either	 you	 actually	 have	 this	 sensitivity	 or	 you	 are	 using	 your
imagination.	It	doesn’t	matter	which	for	now;	you	are	finding	support	for	the	practice	and
that	is	what	matters.	Wh	en	you	find	a	spot,	sit	there.	If	you	want	to	do	more,	dig	out	a
hollow,	preferably	 in	the	shape	of	a	square.	You	can	lie	on	your	stomach	and	connect	to
the	 earth	 and	 the	 energy	 of	 the	 earth	 through	 your	 navel	 chakra.	 Don’t	 worry	 about
whether	or	not	this	is	“real.”	Imagination	is	the	tool	that	develops	the	practice;	use	it	and
don’t	worry	about	it.

After	 you	 learn	 the	practices	 in	 the	 following	chapter,	 you	 can	also	 say	 the	mantra	and
transform	 yourself	 into	 the	 earth	 goddess,	 but	 for	 now	 just	 connect	 through	 the	 raw
element.

Contact	with	 the	physical	 earth	 is	 important	but	need	not	be	elaborate.	You	can	do	 the
practice	sitting	in	a	chair.	Wherever	you	are	right	now	as	you	read	this,	 feel	the	ground
beneath	you.	Feel	the	stability	of	it,	the	immensity	of	the	planet,	the	gravity	that	holds	you
to	it.	Connect	with	the	raw	element.	Let	yourself	be	affected	by	it.	Let	your	imagination	be
free.	Feel	the	stability	and	internalize	it.	Bring	it	in	through	your	skin.	Feel	it	in	your	flesh,
your	 bones,	 your	 central	 channel,	 your	 heart,	 your	 consciousness.	Make	 it	 subtler	 and
subtler,	until	it	pervades	your	experience,	until	you	merge	with	it.

This	 stability	 is	 always	 present	 and	 available	 and	 can	 be	 internalized	 whenever	 it	 is
needed.	The	next	time	you	are	feeling	ungrounded,	scattered,	insecure,	or	weak,	retrieve
earth.	If	you	are	knocked	off	balance	in	your	relationships	or	at	work	or	in	your	internal
processes,	make	the	decision	to	immediately	feel	grounded,	focused,	solid,	and	balanced
by	connecting	 to	earth.	Use	 the	natural	environment	 to	develop	 these	positive	qualities.
Visit	places	 in	which	you	naturally	feel	grounded	and	internalize	the	quality.	Or	focus	 in
your	body	when	you	need	to	ground.	Your	body	is	very	earthy:	the	feeling	in	it	is	the	life	of
the	 earth.	 Bring	 your	 awareness	 there,	 relax,	 and	 connect.	 The	 elemental	 energy	 is
already	 in	 you,	 is	 you;	 it’s	 a	 question	 of	 bringing	 it	 to	 awareness,	 activating	 it,
remembering	it.

Water

If	you	live	near	an	ocean,	a	large	lake,	a	flowing	river,	or	a	still	pond,	go	to	it.	If	you	are
near	 none	 of	 these,	 simply	 pay	 attention	 to	 the	 water	 in	 your	 shower	 or	 bath	 and	 the
water	you	drink.	Or	you	can	just	use	your	imagination.	Imagine	the	ocean:	the	coolness	of



it,	 the	 power	 of	 it,	 how	 it	 flows,	 and	 the	 calm	 of	 its	 depths.	 The	 body	 of	 the	 ocean	 is
peaceful	even	when	the	surface	is	agitated.

Connect	with	those	qu	alities.	If	you	can,	feel	the	energy	of	water	in	your	body.	Internalize
it.	 Bring	 it	 into	 your	 skin,	 your	 muscle,	 your	 bone.	 Feel	 the	 comfort	 of	 water,	 the
relaxation,	 the	ease	as	 it	 flows	around	 rock,	opens	and	accepts	what	 falls	 in	 it,	 rests	 in
whatever	holds	it.

We	lose	this	comfort	too	often.	It	is	the	comfort	of	being	itself,	the	ease	of	being.	We	see
someone	who	upsets	us	or	we	go	to	a	party	or	a	business	appointment	and	feel	uptight,
jerky,	and	agitated.	The	water	element	is	diminished.	Recall	such	situations,	but	this	time
feel	the	comfort	of	water.	Let	the	events	unfold	while	you	remain	internally	at	peace.	And
when	 you	 find	 yourself	 next	 in	 a	 situation	 in	 which	 you	 are	 agitated,	 annoyed,	 overly
critical,	 or	worried,	 connect	 to	water.	 The	 elemental	 energy	 is	 everywhere,	 even	 in	 the
driest	desert–though	it	helps	to	be	near	water	for	support	when	you’re	first	learning	the
practice.

Water	is	comforting.	Like	earth,	it	gives	a	feeling	of	stability.	It	is	accepting	of	others,	of
events,	 of	 self.	 Water	 also	 has	 to	 do	 with	 elimination,	 purification,	 and	 cleansing.	 It	 is
associated	with	feelings	of	peace	and	comfort	and	gentle	joy.

Fire

When	you	have	time,	find	a	sunny	place	such	as	a	bench,	sun-drenched	and	warm.	Or	if
the	sun	isn’t	out,	sit	in	comfort	before	a	fire.	If	you	can	do	neither,	sit	next	to	a	heater	or	a
stove,	or	 imagine	being	near	a	 fire.	Pay	attention	 to	what	you	 feel:	 the	warmth	on	your
skin,	the	relaxation.	Bring	the	heat	in	through	your	flesh	to	the	channels	of	the	body.	Feel
the	 heat	 of	 fire	 circulating	 through	 your	 body,	 the	 heat	 of	 the	 blood,	 the	 heat	 of	 the
metabolism,	the	heat	of	the	muscles,	the	he	at	of	the	nerves	firing.	Feel	emotional	warmth
and	 joy.	Retrieve	 the	quality.	Feel	 it	 fill	 the	center	of	your	body,	 fill	 the	central	channel.
Feel	 the	 warmth	 in	 your	 heart,	 the	 center	 of	 your	 being.	 Allow	 it	 to	 pervade
consciousness.

The	pleasure	of	sitting	in	the	sunlight	feels	good,	but	without	internalizing	the	quality	of
fire	only	part	of	what	is	being	offered	is	received.	Besides	heat	and	comfort,	the	energy	of
fire	has	to	do	with	ripening	and	maturing.	Fire	purifies	through	burning	negativities.	Fire
is	 the	 underlying	 elemental	 energy	 of	 creativity	 and	 accomplishment	 and	 of	 both
substantial	and	insubstantial	bliss.	Fire	is	related	to	orgasm	and,	more	subtly,	to	the	bliss
of	energy	moving	through	the	central	channel.

When	 you	 are	 feeling	 uninspired,	 dull,	 or	 flat,	 connect	 with	 fire.	When	working	with	 a
negative	habit	or	tendency	in	yourself,	burn	it	in	the	fire	of	your	practice.	Use	your	mind
to	 bring	 fire	 into	 areas	 of	 your	 body	 that	 are	 sick	 or	wounded;	 use	 it	 to	 purify	what	 is
there	and	to	invigorate	the	healing	process.	When	you	feel	weak	and	uncertain,	connect
with	fire	for	its	strength	and	its	creative	vision.	When	you	are	weary	or	uninspired,	draw
on	fire	to	give	strength	to	the	will.

In	 the	advanced	practice	of	 inner	 fire	 (tummo)	 the	psychic	 fire	 is	developed.	Successful
yogis	who	practice	 the	 inner	 fire	 are	 able	 to	 live	 in	 the	 cold	 climate	of	Tibet	with	 little
clothing	because	they	can	draw	on	the	energy	of	fire	that	is	always	present.

Air

Air	allows	flow	and	movement.	When	a	strong	wind	arises,	let	it	blow	away	your	negative
karma.	 When	 a	 gentle	 breeze	 arises,	 let	 it	 carry	 away	 discomfort,	 fear,	 and	 negative
thoughts.

Go	to	a	place	where	there	is	wind,	perhaps	a	mountain	pass	or	a	beach.	Or	go	where	the
air	is	cool	and	clean—in	the	shade	of	a	forest	or	beside	a	river.	Gentle	your	breathing.	Feel
the	movement	of	air.	Internalize	it—the	freedom	of	it,	the	quick	int	elligence	of	it.	Feel	the
life	moving	 in	your	 flesh	and	 in	your	thoughts,	and	the	prana	moving	 in	the	channels	of
the	 body.	 Recognize	 the	 air	 in	 the	 central	 channel,	 in	 the	 heart,	 in	 consciousness.	 The
principal	quality	of	air	is	flexibility;	it	is	free.

Air	lifts	the	spirit,	lifts	the	mood.	When	you’re	feeling	down	or	depressed,	connect	to	air.
Air	 is	 light,	 unbound,	 pervasive.	 Internalize	 that.	 When	 stuck	 in	 an	 argument,	 in	 a
depression,	in	a	narrow	point	of	view,	connect	to	the	flexibility	of	air.	Escape	the	prison	of
constricted	mental	 habits	 by	 connecting	with	 air	 and	 flying	 above	 the	walls	 of	 negative



conditioning.

Strong	air	makes	for	fast	progress	on	the	spiritual	path,	but	without	balanced	earth	and
water	 the	 result	 does	 not	 remain.	 Tantric	 practices	 with	 channels,	 chakras,	 and	 prana
develop	the	qualities	of	air.	In	the	practice	of	the	transference	of	consciousness	(pho	wa)
air	 is	 utilized	 to	 move	 consciousness	 from	 the	 confusion	 of	 ignorance	 to	 the	 clarity	 of
realization.	 Air	 allows	 the	 shift	 of	 consciousness.	 The	 air	 element	 underlies	 life-force.
Connect	with	air	to	build	vitality	and	to	develop	greater	freedom.

Space

Sky	gazing	 is	a	very	 important	practice.	Go	up	on	the	top	of	a	hill	where	there	 is	a	big,
unobstructed	view	of	the	sky.	In	front	of	you	is	vast	space.	Your	eyes	should	be	open,	your
body	relaxed,	your	breath	free	and	easy.	Breathe	in	the	open,	clear	sky,	and	allow	yourself
to	dissolve	in	it	when	you	exhale.	Let	pure,	infinite	space	pervade	your	body,	your	energy,
your	mind.	Integrate	your	awareness	with	space.	Merge	with	space.

When		you	integrate	with	space,	healing	occurs.	The	tight,	constricted	knots	of	anger	and
fear,	 of	 desire	 and	 worry,	 dissolve.	 Tensions	 dissolve.	 Thoughts	 dissolve.	 Your	 many
identities	 start	 to	 dissolve.	 The	more	 you	 integrate	with	 the	 space	 element,	 the	 clearer
and	more	expansive	your	awareness	becomes,	unstained	by	whatever	arises	in	it,	always
fresh,	open,	and	unconstrained.	Space	accommodates	everything	without	effort.	Don’t	let
this	practice	be	merely	a	conceptual	exercise;	internalize	the	experience	of	empty	space,
find	 it	 in	 you	 and	 as	 you.	 At	 this	 level	 of	 practice,	 it	 isn’t	 so	much	 about	 realizing	 the
nature	of	mind	(as	it	would	be	when	done	as	a	Dzogchen	practice)	as	it	is	about	dissolving
daily	 problems,	 making	 space	 for	 positive	 experience,	 and	 finding	 and	 developing	 the
capacity	to	release	what	is	negative.

When	the	element	of	space	is	developed,	the	mind	is	clearer	and	there	is	more	joy.	There
is	less	tension.	There	is	more	room	for	whatever	experiences	arise.	If	someone	is	late	for
an	appointment,	it’s	okay—you	have	the	space	to	accommodate	that.	If	you	find	you	have
heavy	responsibilities,	that’s	all	right—there’s	room	for	everything.	This	doesn’t	mean	that
you	have	to	accept	everything;	instead,	you	can	make	a	decision	and	act	from	awareness
rather	than	reacting	impulsively	from	emotional	responses.

In	meditation	practice,	when	the	space	element	is	truly	developed,	the	practice	becomes
Dzogchen,	 abiding	 in	 the	 nature	 of	mind.	 It	 is	 pure	 presence.	 Fully	 integrating	 oneself
with	space	is	integrating	with	the	ground	of	being.

Dedication

At	 the	 end	 of	 all	 practices,	 imagine	 that	 you	 have	 accumulated	 merit	 by	 engaging	 in
spiritual	practice.	Dedicate	this	merit	to	the	welfare	of	all	beings.	Generate	the	heartfelt
wish	that	all	beings	be	freed	from	suffering	and	that	they	find	the	spiritual	path.	There	are
many	 prayers	 that	 can	 be	 recited	 or	 sung,	 but	 more	 important	 is	 to	 actually	 develop
compassion.

ELEMENTAL	SPIRITS

	

Many	 cultures	 that	 live	 close	 to	 the	 earth	 develop	 an	 appreciation	 for	 the	 spiritual
dimension	 of	 the	 natural	 elements.	 They	 recognize	 that	 the	 elements	 are	 not	 only	 raw
materials—they	 are	 also	 an	 environment	 in	 which	 deities	 and	 higher	 and	 lower	 spirits
abide.	There	are	sentient	beings	living	in	each	element.

In	the	level	of	the	teachings	that	I’m	calling	shamanic,	the	forces	that	affect	us	are	taken
to	 be	 outside	 of	 us	 rather	 than	 in	 	 our	 bodies	 or	 minds.	 According	 to	 shamanism,	 the
forces	of	nature	are	alive;	spirits	reside	in	the	rivers,	trees,	rocks,	mountains,	waterfalls,
fires,	planets,	sky,	valleys,	caves,	and	so	on.	These	spirits	are	related	to	the	five	external
elements	 in	 the	way	that	our	 internal	experience	 is	related	 to	our	bodies.	Whatever	our
philosophy,	we	normally	experience	ourselves	as	residing	“in”	our	bodies.	Similarly,	lakes,
trees,	 and	 rocks	are	bodies	 in	which	 spirits	 reside.	 In	 shamanism	 these	entities	are	not
thought	to	be	mental	projections	or	of	questionable	reality.	They	are	autonomous	and	self-
directed.	Those	non-physical	beings	with	whom	we	have	contact	can	be	neutral	toward	us
or	they	can	obstruct	us	or	support	us.

When	we	buy	a	house	or	piece	of	land,	we	feel	some	kind	of	satisfaction	that	the	land	is



now	ours.	But	there	are	already	numerous	beings	on	that	land	who	did	not	participate	in
our	 real	 estate	 transaction.	 There	 are	 a	 great	 number	 of	 non-physical	 beings	whom	we
can’t	see	with	our	physical	eyes	as	well	as	many	substantial	visible	beings	such	as	insects,
birds,	and	animals	 that	dwell	 in	 the	 trees	or	burrow	 in	 the	ground.	 In	some	sense,	 they
own	 the	 land,	 too.	 They	will	 fight	 others	 of	 their	 kind	 to	 preserve	 their	 own	 space	 and
maintain	 their	 boundaries,	 just	 as	 we	 do.	 Yet	 we	 come	 on	 the	 land	 and	 dig	 up	 their
burrows,	cut	down	the	trees	that	hold	their	nests,	uproot	the	plants	they	use	for	food,	and
destroy	 their	 eggs	 and	 their	 babies.	 How	would	 you	 react	 if	 some	 other	 type	 of	 being
suddenly	occupied	your	home,	moved	or	broke	all	your	things,	or	buried	your	house	under
concrete?	We	bring	 this	kind	of	harm	to	other	beings	 that	are	visible	 to	us	and	we	also
bring	this	kind	of	harm	to	beings	invisible	to	us.

When	we	build	a	new	house,	depending	on	how	we	relate	to	the	land	and	the	beings	on
the	land,	we	will	either	be	hindered	or	supported	by	the	spirits	of	the	area.	They	can	harm
us	by	 inflicting	diseases,	causing	obstacles	 in	work	or	relationships,	affecting	our	minds
and	making	spiritual	practice	difficult,	and	affecting	our	energy	and	leaving	us	fatigued,
depressed,	agitated,	or	confused.	On	the	other	hand,	they	can	increase	our	vitality,	protect
us	 from	and	 remove	disturbing	non-substantial	 energies	 in	 our	 environment,	 help	 us	 to
focus	 our	 minds	 for	 spiritual	 practice,	 help	 us	 to	 heal,	 and	 develop	 harmonious
relationship	with	us.

In	 Tibetan	 there	 is	 a	 word,	 sa-dak,	 that	 relates	 to	 the	 earth	 element.	 It	 means	 “earth
spirit,”	 though	the	 literal	 translation	 is	“earth	 lord.”	When	Tibetan	practitioners	use	 the
earth–to	grow	food,	to	build	a	house,	or	to	make	a	road–they	request	permission	to	do	so
from	the	earth	spirits.

Just	as	the	earth	is	full	of	beings,	physical	and	non-physical,	so	is	space.	As	with	the	earth,
these	 beings	 and	 this	 element	 are	 not	 there	 just	 for	 us	 to	 use	 as	 we	 wish.	 Space	 is	 a
fundamental	aspect	of	existence	and	 is	also	a	habitat	 for	many	different	kinds	of	beings
who	live	in	it	much	as	we	do.	Tibetans	believe	that	in	the	space	occupying	a	corner	of	a
room	live	thousands	of	beings	about	whom	we	know	nothing.

We	share	all	the	elements	with	many	beings.	Some	live	even	in	fire	and	the	space	between
stars.	Our	activities	affect	these	other	beings,	and	they	affect	us.

Tibetans	 talk	 about	 the	 “eight	 classes	 of	 beings”:	 srin	 po,	 ma	 mo,	 ‘dre,	 rak	 sha,	 btsan,
rgyal	 po,	 bdud,	 and	 klu.	 The	 beings	 in	 each	 class	 are	 known	 to	 have	 characteristic
appearances,	 temperaments,	 and	 relations	 to	 humans.	 For	 example,	 the	 klu	 are
subterranean	spirits	associated	with	the	water	element.	They	can	be	very	intelligent	and
have	 much	 interaction	 with	 the	 human	 world.	 In	 Bön	 it	 is	 believed	 that	 klu	 are	 often
responsible	for	illnesses	and	other	obstacles	in	life.	It	is	also	believed	that	Dzogchen	and
other	teachings	have	been	taught	throughout	the	world	of	the	klu	and	that	teachings	can
be	received	from	the	klu.

The	 spirits	 associated	with	 rocks	 are	 called	 btsan.	 They	 are	 usually	 represented	 as	 red
people	riding	red	horses,	sometimes	with	red	flags.	In	rocky	places	there	are	often	holes,
tunnels,	 connections	 between	 one	 area	 and	 another;	 Tibetans	 believe	 that	 these	 act	 as
roadways	for	the	btsan	and	that	they	shouldn’t	be	blocked	by	a	building	or	a	road.	This	is
because	the	spirits	can	take	revenge	on	those	who	block	their	way	by	inflicting	pain	in	the
heart	area	and	sometimes	even	causing	death	by	heart	attack.

The	 gyalpo	 are	 a	 class	 of	 spirits	 who	 were	 once	 powerful	 humans	 who	 died	 and	 were
reborn	as	this	kind	of	spirit.	Gyalpo	means	“king.”	Sometimes	they	take	forms	familiar	to
us,	 human	 or	 animal,	 and	 sometimes	 they	 are	 completely	 unfamiliar	 in	 form.	 They	 are
especially	 found	 in	 castles	 where	 kings	 and	 royalty	 were	 murdered.	 In	 Europe	 I
encountered	many	stories	of	ghosts,	usually	of	people	who	died	a	violent	death.	From	the
Tibetan	 point	 of	 view	 these	 could	 be	 gyalpo.	 The	 gyalpo	 can	 be	 tamed	 by	 strong
practitioners	 who	 are	 sensitive	 to	 the	 non-physical	 world	 and	 who	 know	 the	 proper
practices.	Once	 the	gyalpo	are	 tamed,	practitioners	can	often	convert	 them,	 teach	 them
religion,	and	extract	their	promise	to	protect	a	doctrine	or	religious	group.

There	are	spirits	in	trees	and	green	fields	as	well	as	in	areas	of	strong	energy	such	as	the
center	of	large,	flat	places.	There	are	spirits	at	the	junctures	of	roads.	There	are	spirits	of
space—here	not	considered	one	of	the	eight	classes—called	namthel,	that	are	known	to	be
very	hairy.	In	northern	Tibet,	where	my	mother	was	born,	there	are	many	of	these	spirits
and	they	are	propitiated	by	the	people	who	live	there.	Often	the	spirits	become	protectors
for	 villages	 and	 individuals–relationships	 that	 last	 for	 lifetimes.	 They	 often	 appear	 in



dreams	with	messages	for	those	they	are	protecting.

Because	spirits	can	be	positive	or	negative	in	relation	to	humans,	it	is	wise	to	be	careful
with	practices	that	connect	the	practitioner	to	a	spirit.	It	is	currently	popular	for	people	to
take	 drum	 journeys	 in	 their	 imaginations	 and	 to	 look	 for	 guardian	 spirits	 and	 power
animals	and	so	on.	Although	usually	this	is	beneficial,	or	at	least	harmless,	there	really	are
beings	 with	 whom	 the	 rare	 individual	 will	 connect.	 Not	 all	 of	 them	 are	 beings	 anyone
should	want	to	connect	with.	There	seems	to	be	little	regard	for	who	the	being	is;	this	can
be	a	dangerous	practice.	People	are	much	more	careful	about	choosing	a	business	partner
or	a	roommate	than	they	seem	to	be	about	choosing	a	non-physical	being	for	a	guide	or
guardian.

In	 the	 Tibetan	 traditions	 we	 connect	 to	 specific	 deities	 and	 spirits	 who	 are	 already
identified	 in	 the	 tradition.	 In	most	of	our	healing	practices	we	connect	with	beings	who
have	been	tamed	and	have	agreed	to	act	as	guardians,	protectors,	guides,	and	supports
for	 healing.	 In	 the	 ritual	 texts	 there	 is	 usually	 a	 short	 explanation	 of	when	 the	 specific
beings	were	brought	 into	 the	 religious	practice.	 They	were	wild	 spirits	 and	 then	a	past
master	tamed	them;	the	master’s	name	will	be	in	the	text	as	part	of	the	explanation.	When
they	were	tamed	they	agreed	to	help	in	a	particular	fashion	and	were	bound	by	vows.	In
return	practitioners	have	promised	to	make	offerings	to	them,	usually	ritual	offerings	or
liturgies;	the	texts	specify	what	needs	to	be	done.	The	rituals	are	passed	down	the	lineage
from	master	 to	 student	 or	 from	parent	 to	 child.	When	we	begin	 these	practices	we	are
entering	 into	 an	 established	 relationship	 with	 the	 spirits,	 not	 starting	 a	 new	 one,	 and
there	are	stages	in	the	development	of	the	relationship	that	are	explained	in	the	teachings
that	accompany	the	practice.

I	 know	 that	many	 people	 have	 difficulty	 thinking	 of	 spirits	 in	 the	way	 I	 describe	 them.
There	are	many	spirits	described	 in	Tibetan	texts	related	to	specific	places	 in	Tibet.	 I’m
not	sure,	if	we	live	in	New	York	or	Tokyo,	that	it’s	very	helpful	to	try	to	connect	to	those
spirits.	When	we	are	 in	Western	cities,	rather	than	thinking	of	spirits	 living	 in	mountain
passes	or	 caves,	we	might	 find	 it	 easier	 to	 think	 that	 spirits	 travel	 the	 streets,	 creating
anger	and	agitation	 in	 the	drivers.	When	we	experience	aggressive	driving,	 it	 is	a	good
idea	 to	breathe	evenly	and	relax.	Otherwise,	we	may	 find	ourselves	connected	 to	 traffic
demons!

In	any	case,	 it’s	appropriate	 to	become	sensitive	 to	 the	beings	who	 live	 in	 the	elements
and	to	ask	for	their	permission	and	good-will	before	making	changes	to	their	habitats.	And
after	we	have	made	changes	we	should	 thank	those	beings	who	have	been	affected.	We
are	only	one	species	surrounded	by	innumerable	other	sentient	beings	of	various	types,	all
of	whom	wish	to	be	happy	and	free	of	suffering.

Developing	 this	 sensitivity	 and	 compassion	 is	 part	 of	 our	 growth	 and	 is	 a	 step	 toward
recognizing	that	 the	planet	 is	alive	and	sacred,	 that	 the	elements	are	not	 just	resources
but	are	fundamental	aspects	of	a	living	universe.	Living	in	harmony	with	the	natural	world
is	not	only	a	matter	of	our	survival.	We	know	of	many	species	now	facing	extinction	due	to
the	 advances	 of	 the	 modern	 world.	 And	 there	 are	 many	 others	 about	 which	 we	 know
nothing	 who	 are	 also	 being	 harmed	 by	 us.	 Not	 all	 of	 them	 are	 without	 defenses,	 but
certainly	none	of	them	deserves	extinction	at	our	hands.

Imagine	a	being	from	another	dimension	encountering	us	and	seeing	only	flesh.	Imagine
this	being	not	realizing	that	we	are	alive,	that	we	have	intelligence	and	imagination,	that
our	lives	are	the	insubstantial	aspect	and	the	flesh	is	the	substantial	aspect.	And	instead
seeing	only	flesh,	only	meat.	That’s	what	 it’s	 like	when	we	look	at	the	elements	and	see
only	dead	physical	 processes;	we	miss	 the	 sacred	and	alive	 aspect	 of	 the	 elements,	 the
spirits	 that	 live	 in	 them	 and	 are	 of	 them.	 When	 our	 bodies	 get	 sick,	 we	 suffer	 in	 our
insubstantial	mind,	not	just	in	our	flesh.	In	the	same	way,	the	raw	elements	are	important
for	the	beings	who	abide	in	them.	For	them,	the	destruction	or	degradation	of	the	natural
environment	is	like	an	illness	in	the	body	and	they	suffer	on	insubstantial	levels,	just	as	we
do.

It’s	 easy	 to	 discount	 invisible	 spirits,	 but	 doing	 so	 is	 damaging.	When	we	 ignore	 these
beings,	 there	 are	 negative	 provocations	 from	 the	 spirit	 side.	 Diseases	 arise	 that,	 we
believe,	come	from	disturbed	spirits.	We	call	these	diseases	“time	diseases.”	In	the	West
the	same	diseases	may	be	 thought	of	as	 the	 results	of	negative	environmental	 factors—
pollution	and	chemicals	and	so	on.

Some	non-physical	beings	are	aware	of	us,	many	are	not.	Some	are	harmful	to	us,	some



are	 beneficial.	 They	 can	 be	 our	 allies	 or	 our	 enemies	 depending	 on	 what	 kind	 of
relationship	we	build	with	them.

RELATING	TO	NON-PHYSICAL	BEINGS

Doing	 the	 ritual	 practices	 is	 not	 like	 going	 to	 a	 doctor	 and	 getting	 a	 pill.	 Healing	 is
something	we	can	do	for	ourselves.	We	need	to	learn	to	protect	ourselves	from	illness	and
negativity.	One	way	to	do	this	is	through	making	offerings,	which	pacifies	spirits	and	also
develops	generosity	and	compassion.

In	 the	 following	 practices,	 we	 ritually	 invite	 four	 levels	 of	 guests	 to	 attend.	We	 have	 a
different	relationship	with	each	type	of	guest.

	

First	Guests

The	 first	 guests	 are	 the	 fully	 enlightened	 beings,	 the	 buddhas	 and	 bodhisattvas	 and
enlightened	masters.	 Included	 are	 the	 tutelary	 deities	 (yidam),	 fully	 realized	 goddesses
(khandro),	 and	 all	 beings	 who	 are	 free	 of	 ignorance	 and	 who	 have	 perfected	 the	 five
wisdoms.	These	guests	we	do	not	control.	We	don’t	tell	them	what	to	do—we	ask	for	their
blessings.

First	guests	are	always	 invited	 in	meditation	practice.	They	are	 the	beings	 to	whom	we
bow	 when	 doing	 prostrations	 and	 to	 whom	 we	 turn	 for	 r	 efuge.	 Energy	 is	 needed	 for
healing	and	it	is	important	to	connect	with	the	right	source	for	that	energy	and	have	the
right	relationship	with	that	source.	The	best	source	is	the	first	guest.

Second	Guests

The	 guests	 of	 the	 second	 level	 are	 generally	 not	 fully	 enlightened	 but	 are	 nevertheless
powerful.	They	are	beings	 from	 the	god	 realms,	beings	 in	 the	 retinues	of	major	deities,
guardians,	and	dharma	protectors.	Second	guests	may	include	powerful	beings	from	any
realm	of	existence.	In	the	Western	tradition,	angels	are	considered	powerful	beings,	often
frightening	to	encounter;	these	would	be	considered	second	guests.	Also	included	would
be	spirits	associated	with	planets.	In	the	West	we	don’t	think	of	the	planets	as	beings,	but
they	are:	the	moon	embodies	a	being	as		do	the	sun	and	the	other	planets.

Many	healing	practices	are	done	with	 the	help	of	 the	 second	guests	and	we	 treat	 them
with	respect	and	devotion.

Third	Guests

The	guests	of	the	third	level	are	all	those	beings	with	whom	we	have	karmic	connections
and	the	beings	from	the	eight	classes	that	I	described	earlier.	This	means	everyone	with
whom	we	have	connected	and	with	whom	we	still	have	karma—friends	and	enemies	from
this	lifetime	and	all	previous	lifetimes.	It	doesn’t	have	to	be	a	negative	thing	that	connects
us;	 it	can	be	something	 that	simply	needs	 to	be	completed.	However,	as	 this	practice	 is
about	healing,	it’s	most	important	to	invite	the	beings	with	whom	we	have	a	connection	in
need	of	healing.	A	karmic	debt	means	a	kar	mic	connection.	For	example,	in	the	business
world	 two	 people	 may	 run	 into	 difficulties	 with	 each	 other	 but	 because	 of	 the
circumstances	are	unable	to	let	the	relationship	go.	Or	there	are	people	who	seem	to	be
intent	on	making	things	difficult	 for	us	or	who	 irritate	us	 for	no	reason.	Such	situations
indicate	a	karmic	debt.

Many	of	the	disturbances	and	obstacles	we	encounter	in	life	have	to	do	with	interference
from	the	karmic	guests.	Just	as	we	can	have	trouble	in	life	with	a	neighbor	or	colleague
with	whom	we	have	a	bad	relationship,	so	it	is	with	non-physical	beings.	When	there	is	a
problem,	it	 isn’t	helpful	to	think	it	 is	the	fault	of	the	other,	whether	human	or	spirit.	It’s
better	to	realize	there	is	something	that	needs	to	be	done,	something	we	have	to	do.	Like
us,	the	spirit	would	rather	not	be	involved	in	a	disturbance.

Ritual	practice	is	a	way	to	finish	the	disturbance.	Through	it,	debts	can	be	paid.	That’s	the
principle	 in	 shamanic	 practices.	 We	 can	 heal	 these	 connections	 through	 ceremonies,
offerings,	burning	food,	or	offering	smoke,	as	described	below.

Fourth	Guests

The	 fourth	 guests	 are	 the	 guests	 of	 compassion.	 These	 are	 the	 beings	who	 are	weaker



than	 we	 are	 and	 who	 can	 benefit	 from	 our	 help.	 In	 the	 Bön	 shamanic	 tradition	 it	 is
important	to	develop	compassion	as	the	foundation	for	practice.

A	 motivation	 to	 do	 shamanic	 practice	 that	 is	 based	 on	 having	 some	 kind	 of	 spiritual
adventure	or	becoming	distinguished	as	a	special	person	will	not	be	helpful.	It	seems	to
me	 that	 many	 of	 the	 current	 shamanic	 traditions	 don’t	 have	 true	 stages	 of	 growth.
Drumming	and	taking	journeys,	leav	ing	the	body	and	having	imaginal	experiences,	seem
to	be	what	is	considered	important.	But	if	that’s	all	there	is,	it	might	be	more	helpful	for
the	practitioners	to	have	vivid	in-the-body	experiences.

If	 the	 motivation	 is	 a	 desire	 to	 help	 others,	 to	 heal	 and	 alleviate	 suffering,	 then	 the
intention	 is	 based	 on	 compassion.	 In	 this	 case	 shamanic	 practice	 will	 grow	 and	 lead
naturally	into	the	higher	practices.

The	more	the	spirits	connected	to	us	are	happy,	the	happier	our	lives.	This	is	true	on	every
level.	When	 the	 beings	 around	 us	 are	 happy—neighbors,	 spouses,	 friends,	 children,	 the
people	we	work	with—it	makes	us	 happy.	When	 a	 person	we	 are	 connected	with	 is	 not
happy,	often	he	or	she	wants	happiness	 from	us.	And	often	we	don’t	know	what	we	can
give—and	 sometimes	 we	 can’t	 give,	 or	 we	 don’t	 want	 to	 give.	 And	 then	 we	 have	 a
problem.

Similarly,	beings	 in	 the	spirit	 realms	can	want	or	need	something	 from	us	and	we	don’t
know	how	to	give	it	to	them.	We	don’t	realize	that	we	can	give	something	non-physical.	In
the	West,	 material	 is	 valued.	 It’s	 harder	 to	 value	 gifts	 that	 are	 immaterial,	 though	 we
know	how	important	they	are.	To	be	given	love,	trust,	respect,	honesty,	and	friendship	by
others	is	of	great	value;	it’s	more	than	money	can	buy.	Spirits	are	non-physical	and	can	be
satisfied	with	non-physical	offerings.	The	best	basis	for	these	offerings	is	compassion.

MAKING	OFFERINGS

In	all	traditions	of	Tibetan	spiritual	practice,	offerings	are	regularly	made	to	spirits.	The
mandala	offering,	part	of	the	foundational	practices	of	Bön	as	well	as	the	four	schools	of
Tibetan	Buddhism,	is	an	offering	to	the	first	and	second	guests.	The	practice	of	chöd	is	an
offering	to	all	four	guests	and	particularly	to	karmic	guests.	The	dedication	of	merit	that
follows	every	practice	is	an	offering	to	all,	particularly	the	lower	three	guests	who	are	still
in	samsara.	We	offer	the	food	we	eat	and	whatever	we	drink.	We	offer	what	is	beautiful	to
those	above	us.	We	offer	our	wastes	to	whomever		can	benefit	from	them.	Everything	can
be	 offered;	 the	 only	 limit	 is	 whatever	 limit	 we	 impose.	 In	 the	 causal	 vehicles	 a	 large
number	of	offering	practices	are	described.

Some	 offering	 rituals	 are	 very	 elaborate,	 involving	 many	 days	 of	 preparation.	 The
offerings	can	include	all	kinds	of	food,	torma	(figures	made	from	parched	and	dyed	barley
flour),	 alcohol,	 specially	 prepared	 texts,	 precious	 jewels	 and	 stones,	 long	 prayers,
repetitions	of	mantras,	and	many	other	materials.	Offerings	can	also	be	made	 from	 left-
over	 food	 at	 dinner,	 or	made	wholly	 in	 the	 imagination.	Although	most	 often	we	 simply
make	offerings	through	visualization,	it	is	also	good	to	make	substantial	offerings.	It	helps
to	focus	the	ritual	and	makes	it	more	profound.

With	some	practices	like	soul	retrieval,	we	are	recovering	what	is	lost	or	healing	what	is
damaged	 and	making	 offerings	 is	 part	 of	 these	 practices.	 But	we	 should	 also	 regularly
make	offerings	even	when	everything	is	fine.	We	can	make	offerings	to	maintain	harmony
with	non-physical	beings	 in	order	 to	keep	 them	 from	creating	obstacles,	 to	ask	 them	 to
remove	obstacles	that	already	exist,	to	be	of	benefit	to	the	spirits,	to	request	their	support
in	worldly	and	spiritual	matters,	to	honor	our	obligations	to	protectors	and	guardians	and
tantric	deities,	and	to	develop	generosity	in	ourselves.

Although	I	won’t	go	into	great	detail	on	offering	practices,	I	have	included	information	on
some	of	the	ways	we	make	regular	offerings.

One	offering	is	called	chang	bu,	a	 fingerprint	torma.	This	can	be	done	for	oneself	or	 for
another	person.	The	 torma	 is	made	 from	barley	 flour	and	water,	 although	another	 flour
can	be	substituted.	A	dough	 is	made,	not	so	wet	as	to	become	sticky	but	wet	enough	to
hold	a	shape.	It	is	shaped	into	a	thick	roll	and	squeezed	in	the	hand	as	if	the	hand	were
squeezing	a	tube.	A	little	oil	is	put	on	the	hand	first	so	that	the	dough	will	not	stick.	Men
use	the	right	hand,	women	the	left.	The	dough	takes	on	the	imprint	of	the	hand,	marked
with	ridges	and	knots	where	the	dough	is	squeezed	into	the	wrinkles	of	the	palm	and	the
seams	where	 the	 fingers	 lie	beside	each	other.	We	correlate	 the	 impressions	of	 the	 five
fingers	to	the	five	elements	and	the	lines	in	the	dough	made	by	the	bends	in	the	fingers	to



the	sense	offerings.

Once	the	dough	is	shaped	it	is	touched	to	any	part	of	the	body	that	needs	healing.	Touch
on	the	body	draws	attention	to	the	place	touched;	prana	follows	the	attention	since	mind
and	prana	always	move	together.	With	the	attention	on	a	single	part	of	the	body,	sensation
in	 that	part	 increases.	We	can	experience	 this	by	 touching	any	place	on	our	bodies	and
putting	our	attention	there.	When	this	is	done	with	the	chang	bu,	we	use	our	imagination
to	 draw	 the	 illness,	 trauma,	 or	 negativity	 into	 the	 dough.	We	 should	 then	 try	 to	 feel	 a
release	in	that	area	of	the	body.	Then	we	can	move	the	torma	to	another	part	of	the	body
that	needs	healing.	When	we	have	finished,	we	have	a	substantial	symbol	of	our	illnesses,
one	that	is	energetically	connected	to	us;	this	is	offered	to	the	third	and	fourth	guests,	the
beings	who	may	be	causing	and	maintaining	the	illness.	The	intent	behind	the	ritual	is	not
only	 to	 remove	 the	 influence	 of	 the	 spirit	 from	 the	 body,	 but	 also	 to	 give	 the	 spirit
something,	which	 is	done	through	the	offering.	What	 is	given	has	some	of	 the	energetic
properties	 of	 the	 illness,	 but	 it	 is	 now	 in	 a	 purer	 form	 that	will	 nourish	 and	 satisfy	 the
spirit.	When	it	accepts	the	offering,	it	leaves	the	person	whom	it	has	afflicted.

After	 the	 ritual	 is	 finished,	 the	 offering	 is	 taken	 outside	 and	 thrown	 in	 the	 direction
opposite	the	individual’s	birth	year	sign,	the	direction,	it	is	believed,	in	which	the	negative
force	is	most	likely	to	originate.	(If	you	don’t	know	your	sign,	refer	to	the	chart	at	the	end
of	 this	 book.)	 Traditionally,	 after	 a	 ritual	 like	 this	 we	 look	 for	 a	 dream	 that	 signifies
success,	 such	 as	 a	 dream	 of	 insects,	 animals,	 liquid,	 or	 other	 beings	 or	 negative
substances	coming	out	of	the	body.

We	can	also	make	triangular	torma	to	offer	the	guardians	and	protectors.	The	triangular
form	represents	fire	and	is	painted	red	and	given	to	wrathful	beings	such	as	Dorje	Phurba
or	Yeshe	Walmo.	Round	tormas	are	painted	white	or	yellow	and	offered	to	peaceful	deities
such	as	Shenla	Odkar,	Chamma,	or	Tara.	Energetically	we	are	offering	different	qualities
in	order	to	activate	different	qualities	of	different	beings.

We	 make	 more	 elaborate	 offerings	 for	 the	 many	 “ransom”	 rituals	 described	 in	 texts.
Ransom	is	offered	when	it	seems	a	person	is	strongly	possessed	by	a	spirit	or	when	the
affliction	is	powerful.	It	means	what	it	sounds	like:	when	someone	is	being	held,	ransom	is
given	 in	return	for	his	or	her	freedom.	But	we	can’t	 just	use	money	for	ransom,	as	with
kidnappers.	Instead	we	offer	non-physical	beings	what	is	practical	for	them,	offerings	that
nourish	them.

The	ransom	is	a	symbolic	image	of	the	person	made	from	flour,	like	the	torma	described
above.	Around	the	figure	are	all	kinds	of	offerings:	bread,	cheese,	sugar,	salt,	food	with	a
variety	 of	 tastes,	 a	 small	 amount	 of	 money	 as	 a	 symbol	 of	 wealth,	 and	 some	 clothes
belonging	to	the	sick	person.	The	person	being	healed	can	also	write	down	on	paper	what
is	to	be	given	away,	what	is	not	wanted;	these	are	also	an	offering.	The	figure	can	be	small
or	 large.	When	Shardza	Rinpoche,	one	of	 the	most	 famous	of	 the	Bön	masters	of	recent
centuries,	was	very	ill,	his	students	made	a	life-size	effigy	from	dough	and	offered	it	to	the
spirits.	But	it	is	the	intensity	of	the	practice	that	makes	the	symbolism	work,	not	the	size
of	the	offering.

My	mother	was	sick	once	for	a	very	long	time.	We	took	her	to	many	doctors	but	there	was
no	lessening	of	her	illness.	The	one	thing	that	seemed	very	helpful	was	a	big	ransom	we
offered	for	her.	An	effigy	of	my	mother	was	made,	dressed	in	her	clothes,	and	given	to	the
spirits	as	ransom.	We	made	food	as	if	she	were	going	on	a	long	journey.	And	then	we	gave
it	 to	 the	spirits	who	held	her	health	captive.	Even	my	mother’s	name	was	sent	with	 the
effigy.	 Before	 the	 ransom,	 my	 mother’s	 name	 was	 Dolma.	 Afterwards	 she	 was	 a	 new
person	named	Yeshe	Lhamo.	My	mother	had	 identified	with	 the	person	who	 is	sick.	The
ransom	allowed	her	to	instead	become	the	person	who	was	healed.	When	we	identify	with
our	suffering	and	illness,	it	becomes	difficult	to	heal	because	healing	means	giving	up	our
identity.	If	we	can	shift	our	identity,	the	sickness	or	suffering	can	be	left	behind.	The	spirit,
too,	is	connected	to	a	particular	identity	and	if	we	leave	that	identity	behind,	the	spirit	is
left	behind	with	it.

Making	offerings	can	be	very	simple.	When	Lopon	Tenzin	Namdak	Rinpoche	first	visited
the	United	States,	I	 took	him	to	a	 large	grocery	store.	He	was	amazed	at	the	amount	of
food	in	the	stores.	He	said	it	was	a	good	place	to	practice	offering,	walking	through	the
aisles,	 offering	 the	 food	 to	 the	 four	 guests.	We	 don’t	 even	 need	 to	 buy	 anything.	 In	 all
types	of	offerings	we	have	 to	use	our	minds	and	energy	 to	make	the	offerings	real.	The
actual	 offering	 is	 given	 on	 the	 imaginal	 level.	 The	 physical	 offering	 is	 the	 ritual	 that
supports	the	actual,	energetic	offering.



There	are	many	spirits	who	would	like	to	participate	and	to	receive	some	of	the	offerings,
but	they	are	too	weak	or	afraid	to	come	unless	we	invite	them.	When	we	do,	they	are	able
to	attend.

Before	eating	a	meal,	offer	 it	up	 to	 the	 first	and	second	guests.	At	 the	end	of	 the	meal,
simply	 allow	 the	 third	 and	 fourth	 guests	 to	 have	what	 remains.	Nothing	will	 disappear
from	our	plates,	but	energetically	something	is	being	given	and	something	received.	When
lighting	 a	 fire,	 we	 can	 offer	 the	 smoke,	 which	 with	 imagination	 can	 be	 turned	 into
anything	you	think	a	spirit	will	need.

We	can	burn	small	amounts	of	specially	prepared	food	to	carry	the	offering	to	spirits	and
to	the	dead.	When	someone	close	to	us	dies,	we	make	smoke	offerings	for	forty-nine	days,
which	Tibetans	believe	is	the	time	it	takes	to	move	through	the	intermediate	states	on	the
way	to	rebirth.

Make	 offerings	 to	 all	 four	 of	 the	 guests.	 Don’t	 forget	 the	 karmic	 guests,	 the	 beings	 to
whom	you	have	a	connection,	to	whom	you	may	owe	a	debt	of	some	kind.	Invite	them—
they	are	going	to	be	in	your	life	anyway.	Open	your	heart	and	ask	them	to	come,	to	receive
what	you	are	offering.	If	you	then	get	quiet	and	settled,	you	may	see	images	connected	to
these	guests.	Sometimes	these	images	appear	in	dreams.	If	not	an	image,	an	emotion	may
arise.	 In	either	case,	what	 is	 it	or	who	 is	 it	 that	appears?	Some	dream	 figures	give	you
something,	 but	 these	 are	 not	 the	 ones	 with	 whom	 we’re	 concerned.	 It’s	 the	 ones	 who
seem	 to	 want	 something	 from	 you;	 they	 ask	 for	 or	 demand	 something.	 And	 what	 they
want,	you	offer.	Burn	some	food;	as	the	smoke	rises,	imagine	it	turning	into	whatever	the
spirit	may	want.	That	 is	enough.	Making	offerings	develops	 the	capacities	of	generosity,
sensitivity,	and	compassion.

When	you	move	to	a	new	place,	pay	attention	to	dreams	and	experiences.	You	have	new
spirit	neighbors	as	well	as	physical	neighbors,	and	in	both	cases	it	is	good	to	develop	good
relationships.	Make	offerings	to	the	spirits	of	the	place.	If	you	plan	to	build	or	to	change
the	 land	 in	 some	 fashion,	 ask	 permission	 and	make	 offerings.	 You	may	 have	 to	 ask	 the
spirits	to	leave	an	area	in	which	you	are	building.	Be	gentle,	but	if	they	don’t	want	to	go,
you	may	need	to	be	wrathful	instead.

It’s	 supportive,	 when	 performing	 a	 big	 ritual	 such	 as	 a	 ransom,	 to	 schedule	 it	 for	 the
evening	 before	 the	 new	 moon.	 People	 tend	 to	 be	 a	 little	 more	 vulnerable	 at	 night	 as
energy	declines,	and	it	makes	sense	to	work	with	negative	forces	then.

Offerings	should	be	done	 for	 special	occasions,	 such	as	when	someone	 is	 sick	or	dying.
They	can	also	be	done	regularly,	once	a	month	if	you	wish.	Food	and	drink	and	mandala
offerings	can	be	done	daily.	When	yogis	do	retreats	in	the	mountains,	they	may	wish	for
support	from	the	local	spirits	and	will	make	an	offering	of	burned	food	every	day.

In	 the	 West,	 where	 people	 are	 more	 likely	 to	 attribute	 problems	 to	 psychological	 or
biological	 processes	 than	 to	 spirits,	 offerings	 can	 still	 be	 done.	 For	 the	 person	 who
psychologizes	all	problems,	the	offering	will	be	psychologized,	too,	and	will	be	of	benefit.

When	you’re	finished	with	these	rituals,	put	the	offerings	outside.	If	it	is	food,	let	the	wild
animals	 and	 insects	 eat	 it.	 As	 I	 wrote	 before,	 offering	 isn’t	 about	 getting	 physical
substance	to	non-physical	beings,	it’s	about	using	physical	substance	to	empower	internal
practices.	 It’s	 the	 imagination	 and	 the	 feeling	 brought	 to	 the	 practice	 that	will	make	 it
effective	or	not.

Making	offerings	is	a	gesture	of	the	heart	and	a	beautiful	expression	of	generosity.	If	you
consistently	generate	this	experience	in	your	life,	it	will	have	a	positive	effect.

SOUL	LOSS	AND	THE	RETRIEVAL	OF	THE	ELEMENTAL	ENERGIES

In	the	Tibetan	tradition,	as	in	many	shamanic	traditions,	there	is	the	notion	of	“soul	loss.”
Although	this	is	an	imbalance	of	the	elements,	it	is	greater	than	the	imbalances	suffered
in	normal	life.	It	is	a	question	of	degree.	Soul	loss	is	a	profound	loss	of	elemental	qualities
and	 a	 condition	 of	 extreme	 imbalance	 that	 usually,	 though	 not	 always,	 is	 caused	 by
traumatic	external	situations	and	beings.

We	say	 that	 the	soul	can	be	stolen	by	malevolent	beings	of	 the	eight	classes.	What	 this
means	is	that	negative	external	beings	and	forces	can	da	mage	our	capacities	for	positive
human	qualities.	When	these	qualities	are	lost,	they	can	be	retrieved	through	the	practice
of	 soul	 retrieval.	 “Soul	 retrieval”	 is	 how	 I	 am	 translating	 la	 lu	 (bla	 bslu).	 The	 ritual	 is



complicated	and	if	one	is	truly	interested	in	learning	it,	one	must	find	a	qualified	master
and	receive	the	instructions	over	a	period	of	time.	What	I	am	teaching	here	is	related	to
soul	retrieval	but	is	a	different	practice,	the	“retrieval	of	the	elements”(‘byung	ba’i	bcud
‘dus).

Sutra,	tantra,	and	the	shamanic	vehicles	include	practices	to	reconnect	us	to	the	positive
qualities.	 This	 process	 is	 not	 just	 about	 having	 pleasant	 experiences;	 it	 is	 about
connecting	to	deeper	aspects	of	ourselves.	Although	ultimately	we	need	to	go	beyond	the
dualism	of	positive	and	negative,	until	we	actually	do,	positive	qualities	lead	us	closer	to
the	 experience	 of	 the	 base	 of	 existence,	 while	 negative	 qualities	 distract	 us	 and	 lead
further	into	abstraction.

When	the	elemental	qualities	are	lost,	there	is	a	flattening	of	experience,	a	loss	of	richness
and	resonance.	This	is	similar	to	the	experience	of	a	broken	heart.	A	man	or	woman	loses
a	spouse	or	partner	in	a	shocking	way,	is	betrayed	or	abandoned,	and	he	or	she	closes	the
heart.	This	is	a	familiar	theme	in	novels	and	movies:	the	person	can’t	love	because	of	the
fear	of	being	hurt	again.	The	same	kind	of	inner	damage	can	happen	when	someone	loses
a	child,	is	raped,	witnesses	brutality,	is	subjected	to	brutality,	goes	through	a	war,	is	in	a
car	accident,	or	loses	a	house—the	catastrophes	and	calamities	that	fall	upon	us	humans.
The	shock	to	the	soul	overwhelms	it	with	fear,	loss,	or	some	other	powerful	emotion	and
the	result	is	the	loss	of	positive	qualities,	the	loss	of	life-force	and	vitality,	the	loss	of	joy
and	empathy.	It	may	also	result	in	physical	frailty	and	the	loss	of	sensory	clarity.

The	loss	can	happen	all	at	once—as	in	the	case	of	a	single	devastating	incident—or	over
time	when	there’s	a	traumatizing	or	dehumanizing	environment.	In	the	shamanic	view,	the
loss	 in	 both	 these	 scenarios	 is	 always	 related	 to	 negative	 spirits.	 In	 the	 West	 it	 is
understood	 that	 when	 we	 are	 physically	 or	 psychically	 weakened,	 we	 become	 more
susceptible	 to	 infections	 from	 bacteria	 and	 virus;	 we	 are	 also	 more	 susceptible	 to	 the
influence	of	non-physical	beings.	Whether	we’re	damaged	by	non-physical	negative	forces
or	external	events	such	as	an	accident	or	illness,	the	damage	can	be	the	same:	the	loss	of
capacities,	of	elemental	energies.	In	other	words,	soul	loss.

After	 an	 accident,	 for	 instance,	 an	 individual	 may	 experience	 lassitude,	 a	 loss	 of
inspiration	 and	 creativity,	 or	 a	 loss	 of	 vigor.	 This	 condition	may	 heal	 naturally	 but	 if	 it
doesn’t,	if	the	fire	energy	has	been	lost,	it	can	become	chronic.	This	may	show	up	in	work
and	 in	 relationships,	 and	may	manifest	 in	 the	 body	 as	 an	 illness	 and	 in	 the	mind	 as	 a
disturbance	 in	cognitive	activity.	The	accident	 is	 the	apparent	cause	of	 the	 loss,	but	 the
actual	 loss	 either	 can	 result	 directly	 from	 the	 trauma	 or	 can	 come	 as	 the	 person	 is
weakened	 and	 vulnerable	 to	 malevolent	 external	 beings.	 In	 either	 case,	 the	 damage	 is
rooted	in	the	soul.

Perhaps	when	you	put	your	attention	 in	the	area	of	your	heart	chakra,	 for	example,	you
feel	nothing.	Just	keep	it	there.	You	may	feel	strange	sensations.	You	may	feel	pain.	If	you
have	 been	 hurt	 in	 such	 a	 way	 that	 your	 soul	 is	 damaged,	 one	 of	 the	 chakras	 may	 be
closed.	You	may	need	to	spend	a	 long	time	feeling	your	way	in	to	 it.	This	shutting	down
can	be	minor—an	 instinct	 to	close	yourself	off	 for	protection—or	 it	can	be	more	serious
and	manifest	as	a	chronic	lack	of	capacity.

Soul	 loss	 can	appear	 as	depression.	Or,	 if	 earth	 is	 lost,	 as	 anxiety.	 If	 fire	 is	 lost,	 it	may
show	 as	 dullness.	 And	 so	 on.	 Traditionally	 the	 symptoms	 of	 soul	 loss	 are	 said	 to	 be
paleness,	 a	 loss	 of	 color	 in	 the	 face;	 a	 lack	 of	 vitality;	 an	 inability	 to	 concentrate,	 and
perhaps	an	inability	to	walk	well.	Focus	is	lost	in	physical,	emotional,	verbal,	and	mental
behavior.	People	may	feel	weak.	They	can’t	 function	the	way	they	did	before.	They	can’t
get	 to	work	 on	 time.	 They	 can’t	 get	 as	much	done	 as	 they	did	 before.	 They	 can’t	 think
clearly.	This	state	can	continue	until	 the	 loss	manifests	as	a	more	substantial	disease	 in
the	body.

In	 traditional	 Tibetan	 culture,	 when	 people	 begin	 to	 suffer	 from	 this	 kind	 of	 condition,
they	ask	for	a	divination,	considered	an	important	means	to	diagnose	the	source	of	energy
disturbances	 and	 to	 indicate	 what	 can	 be	 done	 to	 heal	 those	 disturbances.	 Divination
sometimes	suggests	the	need	for	a	soul	retrieval.	In	other	cases,	even	without	divination,
people	may	feel	that	a	soul	retrieval	is	warranted.	They	then	ask	a	lama	or	yogi	to	perform
the	ritual	for	them	or,	if	they	know	how,	perform	the	ritual	for	themselves.

THE	ARROW,	TURQUOISE,	AND	SOUL	DEER

During	 the	 soul	 retrieval	 certain	 ritual	 objects	 are	 used	 by	 the	 practitioner.	 Although	 I



describe	them	here,	this	is	not	meant	as	an	instruction	on	how	to	use	them.	In	the	practice
that	 follows	 they	 are	 not	 required.	 I	 include	 their	 description	 in	 order	 to	 give	 a	 fuller
understanding	of	the	soul	retrieval	ritual.

Normally	a	ritual	arrow	called	a	da-dar	 is	used.	 It	 is	made	from	a	piece	of	bamboo	with
three	joints	representing	the	la,	yee,	and	sem.	The	arrow	is	used	to	make	a	connection	to
the	elemental	energies.	The	shaman	first	calls	 to	 the	 four	guests	and	petitions	 them	for
help.	The	arrow	 is	 li	ke	a	wire	attached	 to	 the	source	of	power,	 in	 this	case	 to	 the	 four
guests	 and	 the	 environment.	 During	 the	 soul	 retrieval,	 while	 the	 goddesses	 travel	 to
retrieve	the	elemental	essence,	the	practitioner	holds	the	arrow	point	down	and	makes	a
slow,	counter-clockwise	circle	overhead	with	the	opposite	end	of	the	arrow.	As	the	arrow
moves	away	 from	the	practitioner,	 it	gathers	 the	elemental	energy.	As	 it	moves	back	 in,
the	 gathered	 energy	 is	 brought	 to	 the	 practitioner.	 The	 energies	 of	 the	 life-span	 are
retrieved	 through	 five	 colored	 ribbons	 tied	 to	 the	 top	 of	 the	 arrow—white,	 green,	 red,
blue,	 and	 yellow—representing	 the	 five	 elements,	 and	 symbolically	 stored	 in	 the	 arrow
itself.

The	 arrow	 is	 not	 the	 only	 symbolic	 receptacle	 for	 the	 healing	 energies.	 Most	 Bön-po
people	wear	turquoise	as	a	necklace.	This	is	the	soul	stone,	the	la-gyu,	the	symbolic	holder
of	 the	 soul.	During	 the	 ritual,	 the	 turquoise	 of	 the	 person	 being	 healed	 (if	 it	 is	 not	 the
practitioner)	 is	placed	 in	 front	of	 the	practitioner	and	energies	retrieved	with	the	arrow
are	directed	into	it.

The	third	symbolic	container	is	the	soul	deer,	sha-wa.	The	figure	of	a	deer	is	made	out	of
dough.	In	its	heart	is	a	piece	of	paper	or	fabric	inscribed	with	the	syllable	NI,	representing
the	seed	of	the	human	soul.	Into	the	syllable	in	the	deer’s	heart	are	directed	the	energies
of	 the	 life-force.	 At	 the	 end	 of	 the	 ritual,	 the	 deer	 is	 given	 to	 the	 person	who	 is	 being
healed	and	is	then	kept	on	that	person’s	personal	altar.

It	is	good	to	receive	direct	instructions	on	preparing	and	using	these	ritual	objects.	They
support	 the	practice,	but	 they	are	not	necessary.	The	real	support	of	 the	practice	 is	 the
attention,	 the	 mind,	 the	 imagination,	 and	 the	 feeling	 generated	 by	 the	 practitioner’s
strong	intent.

THE	PRACTICE	OF	RETRIEVING	THE	ELEMENTAL	ENERGIES

In	this	section	are	the	instructions	for	the	practice	of	Retrieving	the	Elemental	Essences.
As	 I	 wrote	 before,	 the	 soul	 retrieval	 is	 a	 complex	 ritual	with	 great	 depth	 that	must	 be
learned	directly	 from	a	master.	The	practice	given	here	 is	 the	retrieval	of	 the	elemental
energy.	This	practice,	unlike	 the	soul	 retrieval,	 is	meant	 to	be	done	 for	yourself,	not	 for
others,	though	of	course	it	can	be	dedicated	to	the	benefit	of	someone	else.

I	 have	 made	 some	 small	 changes	 in	 the	 practice	 based	 on	 my	 own	 experience.	 For
example,	 the	 order	 of	 the	 elements	 is	 different	 than	 in	 the	 text.	 Also	 the	 text	 suggests
t	hat	when	the	practitioner	works	with	the	fire	element,	the	knees	be	drawn	up,	the	ankles
remain	crossed,	and	the	knees	be	held	by	the	arms.	This	is	meant	to	generate	more	heat
but	 is	not	necessary.	The	text	starts	with	the	seed	syllables	 in	the	heart,	and	from	them
the	 transformation	 begins;	 I	 teach	 the	 practice	 with	 the	 syllables	 moving	 toward	 the
practitioner	from	the	far	reaches	of	infinite	space.	It	may	be	that	the	first	is	better	suited
for	people	dominated	by	earth	or	water,	who	benefit	 from	their	energy	moving	out,	and
the	 latter	may	be	best	 for	 those	dominated	by	 fire	and	air,	who	benefit	 from	the	energy
moving	in.	Feel	free	to	try	both	ways	to	find	which	is	best	for	you.

I	have	included	the	original	text	in	an	appendix	so	that	those	who	read	Tibetan	will	have
access	to	the	source	material.

In	 order	 to	make	 it	 easier	 to	 follow	 the	 text	 while	 doing	 the	 practice,	 the	 steps	 of	 the
practice	 are	 written	 below	 in	 italics,	 followed	 by	 an	 explanation	 in	 regular	 type.	 Read
through	the	entire	practice	a	few	times	until	you	have	grasped	the	whole.	Then,	when	you
actually	begin	the	practice,	the	italicized	lines	should	be	enough.	After	you	have	worked
with	the	practice	for	some	time,	the	outline	that	begins	the	following	section	should	be	all
you	need.

Outline	of	the	Practice

Preliminary	Practices:

Nine	Purification	Breaths



Guru	Yoga

Invite	and	connect	to	the	four	guests

The	Main	Practice:

Sound	the	seed	mantra	three,	five,	or	seven	times;	transform	into	the	elemental
goddess.	Recite	the	mantra	of	the	goddess.	Recite	the	mantra	of	the	combined
elements.

	

Evoke	the	elemental	goddess	in	the	organ.	Recite	the	three	mantras.

The	goddesses	travel	to	retrieve	the	lost	elemental	qualities.

The	elemental	energies	fill	the	organ.

Recite	 the	 seed	mantra.	 The	 goddess	 from	 the	 organ	 fills	 the	 central	 channel
with	the	elemental	essence.

The	qualities	and	energies	are	internalized	in	the	deepest	level	of	yourself,	the
most	subtle	levels	of	experience,	as	you	recite	the	mantra	of	the	goddess.	Then
recite	the	mantra	of	the	combined	elements.

Abide	in	pure	presence.

The	practice	is	repeated	for	each	of	the	five	elements.

Recite	the	long-life	mantra.

Merit	from	the	practice	is	dedicated	to	the	welfare	of	all	beings.

The	Nine	Purification	Breaths

Do	the	preliminary	practice	of	the	Nine	Purification	Breaths.	Directions	for	this	practice
were	described	earlier	in	the	book	(see	pp.).

Guru	Yoga

Perform	Guru	Yoga.

Guru	Yoga	is	a	fundamental	practice	in	all	Tibetan	traditions.	If	you	have	not	already	been
taught	 a	 specific	 form	 of	 the	 practice,	 you	 can	 visualize	 all	 the	 enlightened	 beings	 and
teachers	 to	whom	you	are	connected	and	pray	 to	 them.	Relax	your	body	and	open	your
heart.	Generate	 feelings	of	dev	otion	and	gratitude.	Make	a	 sincere	 request	 for	aid	and
support	on	the	spiritual	journey,	and	particularly	for	the	practice	you	are	about	to	do.

The	 central	 figure	 in	 the	 visualization	 can	 be	 a	 Buddha	 or	 your	 teacher.	 If	 you	 have
received	 the	 appropriate	 initiation	 or	 	 transmission,	 you	 may	 use	 a	 male	 or	 female
visionary	deity.	Visualize	a	great	wisdom	fire	coming	from	the	heart	of	the	Master,	burning
away	 your	 negative	 karmic	 traces	 and	 obstructions.	 After	 the	 flame,	 imagine	 powerful
wisdom	winds	rushing	from	the	Master’s	heart,	blowing	away	the	residue	of	the	fire	and
any	remaining	obstructions.	Finally,	visualize	a	torrent	of	pure	water	streaming	from	the
heart	 of	 the	 Master,	 washing	 away	 any	 remaining	 negativities,	 leaving	 you	 completely
purified—a	pure	vessel	fit	for	the	sacred	teachings.

Now,	 receive	 initiation	 from	 the	Master:	 A	 beam	 of	 pure	white	 light,	 originating	 in	 the
chakra	behind	the	Master’s	brow,	shines	into	your	corresponding	chakra	situated	between
and	behind	the	eyebrows.	Through	this	you	receive	the	initiation	and	empowerment	of	the
body.	Feel	your	entire	body	relax.	Then	a	pure	red	light	radiates	from	the	Master’s	throat
chakra	into	your	throat	chakra.	Through	this	you	receive	the	initiation	and	empowerment
of	the	energy.	Feel	an	even	deeper	relaxation.	After	this,	a	pure	blue	light	shines	from	the
Master’s	heart	into	your	own.	Through	this	you	receive	the	initiation	and	empowerment	of
the	mind.	Feel	a	relaxation	into	the	most	subtle	dimension	of	yourself.	Then	imagine	the
Master	and	 the	surrounding	enlightened	beings	 transforming	 into	 light	 that	enters	your
body	 through	 the	 crown	 chakra	 and	 then	 descends	 to	 rest	 in	 your	 heart.	 Let	 all	 effort,
visualization,	 and	 thought	 dissolve,	 and	 rest	 in	 clear	 presence.	 If	 you	 have	 been
introduced	 to	 the	 nature	 of	 mind,	 abide	 in	 that	 during	 the	 practice.	 If	 not,	 remain	 as



present	and	aware	as	possible.

The	Four	Guests

Invite	and	connect	to	the	four	guests.

Invite	the	four	guests	and	visualize	them	in	the	space	above	you	and	surrounding	you	on
all	 sides.	 Connect	 with	 them.	 Don’t	 limit	 yourself,	 be	 open.	 Feel	 an	 emotional	 and
energetic	 connection.	 Let	 it	 change	 you,	 soften	 you,	 and	 revitalize	 you.	 Find	 a	 greater
lightness	 in	 yourself.	 Let	 go	 of	 what	 is	 negative.	 This	 kind	 of	 spiritual	 practice	 is	 not
passive;	you	must	be	involved.	If	you	have	a	strong	intent	and	open	yourself,	higher	forces
and	entities	will	respond,	but	if	you	do	all	this	mechanically	there	will	be	little	benefit.

Invite	the		first	guests

The	 first	 guests	 include	 the	 buddhas	 and	 enlightened	 protectors	 and	 bodhisattvas,	 the
teachers	 of	 the	 lineage	 to	which	 you	 are	 connected,	 and	 the	 deities	 to	whom	 you	 have
tantric	commitments.	The	illuminated	goddesses	of	the	elements	are	included	in	the	first
guests.	 Visualize	 them	 and	 feel	 their	 presence.	 They	 are	 beautiful,	 fully	 enlightened
goddesses.	The	Space	Goddess	is	white,	the	Air	Goddess	is	green,	the	Fire	Goddess	is	red,
the	 Water	 Goddess	 is	 blue,	 and	 the	 Earth	 Goddess	 is	 yellow.	 Make	 prayers	 to	 the
goddesses,	requesting	help	in	removing	internal	and	external	obstacles,	retrieving	the	lost
and	damaged	qualities	of	the	soul,	and	overcoming	even	the	innermost	spiritual	obstacles.
Ask	 for	blessings,	 for	power	and	support,	and	 for	guidance.	Be	clear	about	what	you’re
asking	for.	These	are	the	enlightened	beings	and,	though	beyond	turmoil	themselves,	they
respond	to	our	intent	and	need	and	will	help.	Ask	them	for	healing	for	yourself	and	for	all
beings	who	need	healing.

If	you	don’t	believe	 in	spirits,	 just	 try	 to	connect	 to	higher	 forces.	 It’s	not	a	question	of
believing	 and	 not	 believing.	We	 all	 have	 the	 experience	 of	 higher	 forces.	 Here	 we	 are
giving	 them	 a	 name	 and	 trying	 to	 understand	 them	 as	 they	 are	 understood	 and
experienced	 in	 the	 ancient	 Tibetan	 traditions.	 If	 you	 focus	 on	 and	 connect	 with	 these
forces,	whatever	name	you	use,	you	can	draw	positive	qualities	from	that	connection.

Invite	the	second	guests

Connect	 to	 the	 second	 guests.	 They	 are	 the	 powerful	 guardians	 and	 protectors	 of	 the
teachings,	gods	and	goddesses,	and	the	beings	that	are	the	stars	and	planets.	Ask	them
for	healing	power	in	order	to	heal	yourself	and	others.	Ask	them	to	remove	obstacles	and
pacify	disturbances.	Ask	that	they	bless	you	with	their	own	positive	qualities.

Invite	the	third	guests

Connect	 to	 the	 third	 guests:	 the	 eight	 classes	 of	 beings	 and	 the	 karmic	 guests.	 These
include	the	spirits	related	to	place—to	the	mountains,	the	water,	the	trees,	and	the	fields.
They	 are	 the	 forces	 you	 can	 feel	 in	 different	 locations,	 that	 can	 be	 beneficent	 or
malevolent.	Ask	them	to	support	you	and	to	not	disturb	you.	Request	that	they	guide	you
to	 the	 time	and	place	where	your	energies	and	qualities	were	 lost,	 stolen,	 or	damaged.
Connect	 to	 the	spirits	who	have	 taken	energies	 from	you	and	ask	 that	 they	return	what
they	took.	Offer	them	prayers	for	their	well-being.

Invite	the	fourth	guests

Connect	to	the	fourth	guests,	the	guests	of	compassion.	These	are	the	beings	weaker	than
you	and	beings	who,	like	yourself,	suffer	the	difficulties	of	daily	life,	whatever	realm	they
may	inhabit.	Imagine	offering	them	whatever	they	need	in	order	to	be	happy	and	healthy.
Cultivate	generosity	 in	your	giving.	Ask	 them	for	help	 in	healing	 the	soul	and	 life-force,
and	to	return	the	energy	they	have	taken.

The	Transformation	of	the	Body

Sing	 the	 mantra	 MA	 KHAM	 three,	 five,	 or	 seven	 times.	 Immediately,	 from	 the	 infinite
distances	 of	 vast	 space,	 many	 luminous	 yellow-golden	 syllables—MA	 KHAM—begin	 to
move	 toward	you.	They	 radiate	 the	pure	yellow	 light	of	 the	earth	element	and	 the	 light
washes	 over	 and	 through	 you.	 The	 syllables	 gather	 above	 your	 head,	 above	 the	 crown
chakra,	and	then	descend.	Feel	the	sensation	on	your	crown	as	they	enter	your	body.	The
moment	they	touch	the	top	of	your	head,	your	entire	body	is	instantaneously	transformed
into	the	Earth	Goddess.	Visualize	this,	but	more	importantly,	feel	the	change.



	

Your	 skin,	 flesh,	 blood,	 nerves,	 channels,	 bones—all	 the	 cells	 in	 your	 body—are
transformed	into	the	elemental	earth	energy.	You	are	earth!	In	your	left	hand	is	a	vase	full
of	 the	 healing	 nectar	 of	 the	 earth	 element.	 In	 your	 right	 hand	 is	 the	 counterclockwise
swastika	representing	the	changeless,	eternal	truth.	Completely	embody	the	energies	and
qualities	of	the	Goddess	of	Earth.	Feel	her	presence,	loving	and	wise,	and	pray	to	her	to
remove	any	diseases,	pain,	or	afflictions	on	the	level	of	the	body.

Then	 sing	 the	mantra	 of	 the	 goddess—KHAM	 LA	 ZHI	 KYE	 LE	 DU—as	 you	 receive	 her
blessings,	generating	the	experience	of	the	positive	qualities	of	the	earth	element	in	the
body.	 Feel	 grounded,	 strong,	 capable,	 steady,	 and	 feel	 that	 all	 illnesses,	 obstacles,	 and
obstructions	of	the	body	are	removed.

Finally,	 abide	 in	 the	 transformed	 state	 while	 singing	 the	 mantra	 of	 all	 the	 elements
combined:	A	YAM	RAM	MAM	KHAM	BRUM	DU.	This	seals	the	practice,	empowering	and
stabilizing	the	experience.

This	is	the	transformation	of	the	body.

There	 are	 five	 parts	 to	 the	 practice,	 one	 for	 each	 of	 the	 elements.	 This	 example	 of	 the
practice	 is	 centered	 on	 the	Earth	Goddess.	When	working	with	 the	 other	 elements	 and
other	goddesses,	change	 the	particulars—the	mantra,	color,	 implements,	and	organ	 (see
the	chart	placed	after	the	description	of	the	practice)—and	try	to	feel	the	qualities	of	the
particular	 element.	 Beyond	 the	 differences,	 all	 the	 goddesses	 are	 enlightened,	 loving,
powerful,	 and	 beautiful.	 They	 are	 the	 pure	 aspect	 of	 the	 elemental	 energy	 that	 is
enlightened	and	that	can	respond	to	you	as	an	individual.

If	 you	 wish,	 you	 can	 work	 with	 only	 one	 of	 the	 elements	 and	 one	 of	 the	 elemental
goddesses	in	a	practice	period.	Or	you	can	do	the	practice	with	each	element,	one	after
the	 other.	 It	 may	 be	 easiest	 to	 begin	 with	 the	 Earth	 Goddess	 and	 then	 to	 work	 with
increasingly	less	substantial	elemental	energies—water,	fire,	air,	and	finally	space.

The	seed	mantras	all	start	with	MA,	the	syllable	representing	female	divinity.	The	sound	is
related	 to	 the	 mother	 in	 many	 languages:	 ma,	 mama,	 ama.	 From	 the	MA	 comes	 the
transformation	into	a	goddess.	The	second	syllable	is	the	seed	syllable	of	the	element	and
from	it	comes	the	particular	qualities	of	the	goddess.

Different	 texts	 use	 different	 mantras	 for	 the	 elements.	 MAM	 is	 sometimes	 BAM,	 for
example.	Don’t	let	this	confuse	you;	it’s	the	intent	of	the	practice	that	is	important.

As	 you	 generate	 the	 positive	 qualities	 of	 the	 element	 and	 receive	 the	 blessings	 of	 the
goddess,	 recite	 her	 mantra:	 KHAM	 LA	 ZHI	 KYE	 LE	 DU.	 There	 is	 no	 fixed	 number	 of
recitations—sing	the	mantra	as	long	as	it	is	helpful.	Allow	the	practice	to	open	and	soften
your	heart.

Then	abide	 in	 the	transformed	state	as	you	recite	 the	mantra	of	 the	combined	elements
—A	YAM	RAM	MAM	KHAM	BRUM	DU—	for	as	long	as	you	are	comfortable.

The	Transformation	of	the	Energy

You	have	transformed	into	the	goddess.	Again,	sing	the	mantra	MA	KHAM	three,	five,	or
seven	times.	Keep	your	mind	focused	in	the	spleen.	(The	organ	is	in	the	transformed	body.
If	 you	 cannot	 feel	 the	 organ,	 focus	 in	 the	 part	 of	 the	 body	 where	 the	 spleen	 is.)	 Now
visualize	and	feel	the	presence	of	the	Earth	Goddess	in	the	organ.	The	goddess	situated	in
the	 organ	 is	 the	 same	 luminous	 yellow	 goddess	 into	 which	 you	 have	 transformed,	 but
smaller.	Pray	to	her,	asking	her	to	remove	all	energetic	obstacles	and	negativities,	asking
that	she	cultivate	in	you	the	positive	qualities	of	earth.



Use	 your	 imagination	 to	 make	 a	 strong	 connection	 to	 the	 goddess,	 to	 her	 love	 and
wisdo	m,	as	you	recite	her	mantra:	KHAM	LA	ZHI	KYE	LE	DU.	Feel	that	all	obstructions
and	negativities	on	the	level	of	energy	are	being	removed,	all	illnesses	healed,	all	mental
confusions	cleared.	As	before,	in	her	left	hand	is	a	vase	filled	with	healing	nectar,	in	her
right,	the	counterclockwise	swastika.	Feel	the	transformation	in	the	dimension	of	energy.

Finally,	abide	in	the	transformed	state	as	you	recite	the	mantra	of	the	combined	elements
—A	YAM	RAM	MAM	KHAM	BRUM	DU—for	as	long	as	you	are	comfortable.

This	is	the	transformation	of	the	energetic	dimension.

In	Tibetan	medicine	the	elements	are	related	to	the	internal	organs.	The	practice	begins
with	the	transformation	of	the	body,	and	then	transforms	the	more	subtle	level	of	energy
represented	 by	 the	 organ.	 Healing	 the	 organ	 is	 an	 important	 part	 of	 the	 practice	 but
because	the	energetic	dimension	is	what	is	being	worked	with,	the	physical	organ	is	less
important	than	the	energy;	if	you	are	missing	a	spleen,	or	lung,	or	kidney,	work	with	the
area	of	the	body	and	the	sensation.	The	feeling	is	as	important	as	the	visualization.

With	the	double	organs—lungs	and	kidneys—visualize	a	goddess	in	each.	For	the	elements
other	 than	 earth,	 the	 goddesses	 in	 the	 organs	 hold	 different	 implements	 than	 the
goddesses	 into	 whom	 you	 transform	 yourself.	 Look	 at	 the	 chart	 on	 pages	 for	 this
information.

Retrieving	the	Elemental	Energies

Breathe	 slowly	 and	 deeply.	 With	 each	 exhalation,	 the	 goddess	 in	 the	 spleen	 sends	 out
countless	 emanations	 of	 herself	 to	 retrieve	 the	 elemental	 earth	 essence.	 They	 travel
through	the	channels	of	the	body	and	leave	through	the	right	nostril.	As	they	leave,	they
carry	from	your	body	whatever	is	negative,	no	longer	needed,	or	toxic	and	release	those
things,	dissolving	them	in	pure	space.

The	 goddesses	 travel	 beyond	 any	 limitations	 of	 time	 and	 space.	 They	 travel	 to	 the
enlightened	 beings	 and	 ask	 for	 your	 healing.	 They	 travel	 to	 times	 and	 scenes	 in	which
positive	 elemental	 qualities	have	been	 lost	 and	 retrieve	 the	elemental	 essence	 that	was
lost	there.	They	travel	to	places	of		great	natural	power—where	the	earth	energy	is	strong
and	where	great	masters	have	practiced—and	collect	the	elemental	energies.	They	travel
to	beings	who	have	taken	the	energies	from	you	and	they	recover	what	was	taken.

The	elemental	energies	are	retrieved	as	pure	elemental	essence	and	carried	in	the	vases
that	each	goddess	has	in	her	left	hand.	The	goddesses	return	and	enter	your	body	with	the
inhalation,	through	the	left	nostril.	They	are	like	bees	returning	with	pollen	collected	from
many	flowers.	They	enter	the	spleen	and	pour	what	they	have	recovered	into	the	organ,
healing	 it,	 andinto	 the	 vase	 the	 goddess	 in	 the	 spleen	 holds.	 As	 the	 organ	 is	 healed,
imagine	all	energetic	obstacles	being	cleared.	Between	the	inhalation	and	the	exhalation,
hold	 the	 breath	 gently	 for	 a	 few	 seconds	 and	 feel	 the	 elemental	 energies	 pervade	 all
experience.	 Then,	with	 the	 exhalation,	 the	 goddesses	 travel	 back	 out	 through	 the	 right
nostril	and	the	cycle	repeats.	With	each	exhalation	goddesses	travel	outward,	with	each
inhalation	 goddesses	 return	 to	 you	 with	 the	 elemental	 essence.	 Spend	 time	 with	 this,
breathing	 deeply	 and	 slowly	 into	 and	 from	 the	 spleen,	 expelling	 what	 is	 negative	 and
accumulating	the	positive	earth	energies.	Feel	the	presence	of	the	goddess,	loving,	wise,
and	powerful.	Feel	the	changes	in	your	body,	energy,	and	mind.

As	 the	 goddesses	 leave	 your	 transformed	 body	 through	 the	 right	 nostril,	 they	 travel
without	 any	 restrictions.	 They	 go	 to	 enlightened	 beings	 and	 ask	 for	 healing	 energy	 for
you.	 They	 go	 to	 the	 places	 and	 incidents	 in	 the	 past	 where	 you	 know	 you	 lost	 some
positive	 quality	 connected	 with	 the	 element.	 In	 the	 case	 of	 earth,	 it’s	 where	 you	 lost
groundedness,	strength,	steadfastness,	confidence,	 fertility,	capability.	You	needn’t	try	to
direct	the	goddesses	or	look	for	such	incidents,	just	let	them	go.	They	go	into	the	past	of
this	life	and	other	lives,	to	the	scenes	of	trauma,	loss,	terror,	or	shock.	They	enter	all	six
realms	of	existence.	They	visit	areas	of	great	natural	potency,	 taking	earth	energy	 from
the	mountains,	the	fields,	the	grasslands,	and	the	deserts.

This	is	the	main	part	of	the	practice.	If	you	have	time,	spend	a	half-hour	to	an	hour	doing
just	 this	 part	 of	 the	 practice,	 breathing	 slowly	 and	 deeply,	 exhaling	 from	 the	 organ,
inhaling	into	the	organ,	breathing	out	the	negativities,	breathing	in	the	positive	qualities
of	the	element’s	essence.

With	each	visit	to	a	place	or	time	or	being,	the	goddesses	recover	the	elemental	essence



as	 healing	 nectar—luminous,	 yellow,	 elemental	 earth	 energy	 (or	 whichever	 elemental
energy	 you	are	working	with)	 gathered	 in	 the	 vases	 they	hold	 in	 their	 left	 hands.	 Then
they	return,	entering	your	transformed	body	with	the	inhalation,	through	the	left	nostril.
They	return	to	the	organ	and	pour	the	light	of	the	elemental	essence	into	the	organ	and
into	 the	 vase	 of	 the	 goddess	 there.	 The	 nectar	 is	 a	 psychic	 and	 spiritual	medicine	 that
heals	even	the	most	subtle	levels	of	your	being.

You	 can	 use	 your	 fingers	 to	 block	 one	 nostril	 and	 then	 the	 other	 but	 it	 isn’t	 necessary.
Simply	visualizing	the	goddesses	leaving	from	the	right	nostril	and	returning	through	the
left	 is	 enough.	 Breathe	 deeply,	with	 your	 full	 attention.	 Don’t	 be	 thinking	 of	 something
else.	Make	the	inhalation	slow	and	deep.	The	exhalation	can	be	a	little	stronger.	Feel	the
organ	itself	doing	the	breathing	and	healing	in	the	process.	Feel	the	elemental	quality	not
only	in	the	organ,	but	also	radiating	throughout	the	body,	healing	body,	energy,	and	mind.
With	each	exhalation	more	goddesses	leave	to	retrieve	the	element.	With	each	inhalation
goddesses	return,	pouring	the	elemental	light	they	have	retrieved	into	the	organ.

The	goddesses	may	go	to	places	unknown	to	you.	As	they	travel,	images	or	memories	may
arise.	 In	 the	 West	 it	 seems	 common	 for	 traumatic	 memories	 to	 be	 activated.	 If	 this
happens	to	you,	just	let	the	goddesses	go	to	the	event	and	retrieve	the	positive	qualities
that	were	lost	there	as	pure	elemental	energies.	Don’t	be	concerned	if	emotion	arises.	And
don’t	 lose	your	transformed	identity;	remain	as	the	powerful	and	enlightened	identity	of
the	goddess	and	abide	 in	 the	balance	of	 the	 sacred	elements.	 If	 you	 revisit	 a	 traumatic
incident,	 visit	 with	 power,	 strength,	 and	 forgiveness	 as	 the	 goddess	 would,	 and	 allow
healing	to	take	place.

The	goddesses	may	also	go	directly	to	non-physical	beings	to	recover	what	those	beings
took	from	you.	This	is	the	traditional	way	of	describing	what	occurs	during	the	retrieval	of
the	elemental	qualities.	And	they	may	go	 to	areas	of	 the	natural	world	 that	have	strong
elemental	energy—the	water	of	the	ocean,	the	fire	of	a	volcano,	the	air	at	the	top	of	the
highest	mountains,	the	earth	of	raw	land,	and	the	space	of	the	sky.	They	go	to	the	spirits
associated	with	 the	 elements,	 the	divine	 forces	 associated	with	 the	 elements.	 You	don’t
need	to	plan;	just	let	them	go	freely.	Continue	to	let	images	arise—they	help	connect	you
to	specific	qualities—but	don’t	hold	on.	Let	them	fade	away	or	transform.

Continue	until	you	feel	healed.

The	Transformation	of	the	Mind

Exhale	fully,	then	inhale	deeply.	Imagine	all	the	goddesses	returning	with	that	inhalation.
They	 enter	 the	 organ,	 pour	 out	 the	 elemental	 essence	 they	 have	 retrieved,	 and	 are
absorbed	back	into	the	goddess	in	the	organ.	Hold	the	breath	for	a	few	moments	and	feel
the	elemental	energy	pervade	the	body	and	pervade	every	element	of	experience.	Repeat
this	a	few	times.

Sing	 the	mantra	MA	 KHAM	 three,	 five,	 or	 seven	 times.	 As	 you	 do,	 the	 goddess	 in	 the
organ	becomes	 increasingly	 lively,	 vivid,	and	 joyful.	From	 the	vase	 in	her	 left	hand,	 she
pours	the	essence	of	the	earth	element,	in	the	form	of	a	nectar	of	pure	yellow	light,	into
your	crown	chakra,	into	the	blue	central	channel,	filling	it	with	luminous	earth	en	ergy.

Feel	 the	 healing	 nectar	 flowing	 into	 the	 central	 channel,	 from	 the	 crown	 chakra	 to	 the
bottom	of	 the	central	channel	 four	 finger-widths	below	the	navel.	Feel	 it	 flowing	up	and
down	the	central	channel,	removing	even	the	most	subtle	obscurations	and	blockages,	and
allow	 yourself	 to	 feel	 increasing	 peace	 and	 bliss.	 The	 nectar	 slowly	 accumulates	 in	 the
heart	 center,	 and	 then	 is	 integrated	 into	 consciousness,	 into	 the	 soul.	 Develop	 the
experience	as	much	as	possible	while	chanting	the	mantra	of	the	goddess:	KHAM	LA	ZHI
KYE	LE	DU.	Feel	the	light	in	the	heart	center	and	in	the	deepest	levels	of	experience.	Feel
it	 integrate	 with	 your	 awareness	 until	 awareness	 and	 the	 elemental	 quality	 merge
completely.	 Feel	 that	 whatever	 needs	 healing	 is	 healed.	 Whatever	 needs	 to	 be
strengthened	 is	 strengthened.	 Ignorance	 is	dispelled	and	wisdom	manifests,	particularly
the	wisdom	of	equanimity.	The	subtle	spiritual	and	mental	obscurations	are	cleared.	Use
your	imagination,	your	deep	breathing.

Then	abide	in	the	transformed	state	as	you	recite	the	mantra	of	the	combined	elements—A
YAM	RAM	MAM	KHAM	BRUM	DU—for	as	long	as	you	are	comfortable.	Feel	that	all	your
doubts	are	resolved	and	abide	in	the	nature	of	mind:	changeless,	with	neither	beginning
nor	end,	clear,	fresh,	vivid.

Imagine	the	positive	qualities	that	have	accumulated	in	the	vase	of	the	Earth	Goddess	in



your	 heart	 to	 be	 the	 pure	 healing	 nectar	 of	 the	 earth	 element.	 As	 you	 sing	 the	 seed
syllable	of	 the	Goddess	 three	 times,	 she	 rises	up	 from	your	heart	 and	pours	 the	golden
nectar	into	your	crown	chakra.	Experience	the	nectar	flowing	down	through	your	central
channel.	The	nectar	in	the	central	channel	is	the	subtlest	dimension	of	healing.

Feel	 your	 deepest	 doubts	 clarify;	 experience	 the	 nature	 of	mind:	 changeless,	 ceaseless,
bright,	 fresh,	vivid.	Feel	 this	unbounded,	open	presence,	and	merge	your	mind	with	 the
unbounded	 state.	 The	 visualization	 dissolves	 into	 space	 as	 your	mind	 dissolves	 into	 the
natural	state.	Rest	there	as	long	as	the	experience	remains	fresh.

From	the	depth	of	connection	with	the	natural	state,	recite	the	mantra	as	the	self-arising
sound	 of	 the	 Goddess.	 All	 subtle	 obstacles	 to	 contemplation	 and	 all	 doubts	 are	 healed
through	the	power	of	the	mantra	and	the	blessings	of	the	Goddess.	Reinforce	the	power	of
your	meditation	with	the	Long	Life	Mantra.

Finally,	 remain	 in	 silence	 in	 a	 relaxed,	 aware	 state	 as	 long	 as	 it	 is	 fresh.	 Observe	 the
results	of	the	practice.	Abide	in	pure	presence.

In	the	practice	of	 the	retrieval	of	 the	elements	 the	healing	works	 from	the	external,	 the
body;	to	the	energy,	the	organ;	to	the	central	channel;	to	the	heart	center;	to	the	soul.	In
the	shamanic	view,	the	soul	abides	in	the	heart	center	in	the	central	channel.	The	soul	is
not	healed	until	 the	energy	 is	brought	 into	 the	 subtlest	 level	of	 experience.	The	 sign	of
accomplishment	in	the	practice	is	that	the	whole	being	is	affected.	The	more	strongly	you
can	generate	the	experiences	in	the	practice,	the	more	profound	the	effects	will	be.

The	Long	Life	Mantra

At	the	end	of	the	practice,	whether	you	have	worked	with	one	element	or	all	five,	sing	the
long-life	mantra	three,	five,	seven,	or	as	many	times	as	you	wish.

SO	DRUM	A	KAR	MU	LA	TING	NAM

‘OD	DU	MU	YE	TSE	NI	DZA

(Pronunciation:	so	droom	a	car	mu	la	ting	nam	o	due	mu	yea	tsay	nee	dza)

This	mantra	is	sung	to	support	healing	and	long	life.	It	is	sung	at	the	end	of	the	practice	in
order	 to	act	as	ar	mor,	 to	protect	 the	positive	 results	of	 the	practice.	Although	mantras
cannot	be	 literally	translated,	often	each	syllable	carries	a	symbolic	meaning.	Below	are
the	meanings	associated	with	the	syllables	of	the	long-life	mantra:

SO	empty	space

DRUM	Long	Life	Deity’s	castle

A	KAR	unborn	wisdom



MU	LA	seed	syllable	of	yogi

TING	NAM	nectar

‘OD	DU	receiving	long-life	force

MU	YE	prosperity

TSE	long	life

NI	seed	syllable	of	the	human	realm

DZA	light	that	is	the	medium	for	positive	qualities

Dedication

At	 the	 end	 of	 all	 practices,	 dedicate	 the	merit	 to	 the	 benefit	 of	 all	 beings.	 Your	motive
should	always	be	 to	help	others.	Even	your	own	healing	 should	be	undertaken	with	 the
intention	that	your	increased	health	and	wholeness	will	enable	you	to	better	aid	others.

The	Goddess	Practice	with	the	Other	Elements

To	 work	 with	 the	 other	 elemental	 goddesses	 follow	 the	 outline	 of	 the	 above	 practice,
changing	the	features	and	qualities	particular	to	each	element.	This	means	changing	the
color,	the	mantra,	the	implements,	the	organ,	and	particularly	the	qualities.	I	summarize
the	 changes	 in	 the	 following	 chart.	 The	 implements	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 the	 goddesses	 are
listed,	first	the		implement	in	the	right	hand,	then	the	left.	I	have	also	listed	an	image	for
each	element	to	suggest	a	metaphor	for	the	sense	of	the	element.

In	the	beginning	don’t	worry	about	what	the	implements	are	or	any	of	the	other	details.
Instead,	focus	on	your	experience.	Generate	the	positive	qualities	of	the	elements	and	try
to	make	the	experience		as	strong	as	possible—really	feel	all	this	in	your	body,	energy,	and
mind.	Pay	attention	to	the	results	of	the	practice.	Once	you	have	strong,	felt	experience,
then	 add	 the	 details.	 Your	 internal	 experience	 is	 more	 important	 than	 having	 all	 the
details	correct.

Note	 that	 when	 working	 with	 the	 space	 goddess	 there	 is	 not	 a	 second	 goddess	 in	 the
associated	organ,	the	heart.	Instead,	visualize	a	luminous	white	A

radiating	light	of	five	colors	(yellow,	blue,	red,	green,	and	white).	Because	the	A	is	already
in	 the	 heart	 center,	 the	 nectar	 is	 not	 poured	 into	 the	 central	 channel.	 It	 is	 gathered
directly	into	the	heart	chakra	during	the	practice,	as	the	many	goddesses	return	with	the
vases	full	of	the	nectar-like	elemental	space	energies.

As	I	indicated	earlier,	the	most	important	aspect	of	the	practice	is	to	develop	the	ability	to
generate,	and	to	 integrate	with,	 the	qualities	of	 the	elements.	There	are	three	stages	of
transformation	in	the	practice,	during	each	of	which	you	should	try	to	develop	the	specific
qualities	 of	 the	 elements	 in	 the	 dimensions	 of	 the	 body,	 energy,	 and	 mind.	 When	 the
mantric	 syllables	 touch	 the	 top	 of	 your	 head	 and	 you	 transform	 your	 body	 into	 the
goddess,	 generate	 the	 feeling	 of	 the	 qualities	 associated	 with	 the	 element	 in	 the	 body.
When	 evoking	 the	 goddess	 in	 the	 organ,	 feel	 the	 energetic	 qualities	 of	 the	 element
pervade	 the	 energetic	 dimension	 of	 your	 experience.	 When	 the	 elemental	 essence	 is
poured	into	the	central	channel,	feel	the	integration	of	the	elemental	essence	in	the	most
subtle	 dimension	 of	 experience,	 the	 dimension	 of	 light,	 as	 changes	 in	 the	 qualities	 of
consciousness.



As	 with	 the	 earlier	 practice	 of	 internalizing	 qualities	 from	 the	 natural	 elements,	 the
progression	 in	 this	 practice	moves	 from	 gross	 to	 subtle.	 First	 the	 body	 is	 transformed,
then	 the	organ	associated	with	 the	element.	Thepure	elemental	energy	heals	 the	organ,
then	 is	 poured	 into	 the	 central	 channel.	 It	 then	 accumulates	 in	 the	 heart	 center	 and	 is
integrated	with	consciousness.	The	quality	of	the	element	is	the	same	during	each	step	of
the	practice	but	it	is	meant	to	permeate	progressively	subtler	levels	of	experience,	finally
integrating	into	pure	consciousness.

If	you	are	particularly	working	with	difficulties	in	your	daily	life—relationships,	jobs,	and
so	on—add	emphasis	to	the	transformation	of	the	body	and	the	generation	of	the	grosser
qualities	 of	 the	 element.	 If	working	with	more	 energetic	 problems—disturbances	 in	 the
emotions,	 health,	 or	 energy—then	 give	 emphasis	 to	 the	 evocation	 of	 the	 goddess’
presence	 in	 the	organ	and	 to	 the	generation	of	 the	 elemental	 qualities	 in	 the	 energetic
dimension.	 If	 you	 are	 working	 with	 obstructions	 in	 meditation	 practice	 and	 in	 your
spiritual	 life,	 then	 emphasize	 the	 integration	 of	 the	 quality	 with	 the	 mind,	 when	 the
elemental	energies	are	poured	into	the	central	channel.

When	 the	 elemental	 essence	 is	 poured	 into	 the	 central	 channel,	 try	 to	 feel	 that	 any
obscurations	or	negative	emotions	associated	with	the	element	are	entirely	overcome	and
that	the	positive	qualities	are	generated.	Each	element	is	associated	with	one	of	the	five
wisdoms	which	dawns	when	the	element	is	completely	purified	and	integrated.

Element:	Earth

Mantra	for	transformation:	MA	KHAM

Mantra	of	the	goddess:	KHAM	LA	ZHI	KYE	LE	DU

Mantra	of	all	the	elements	combined:	A	YAM	RAM	MAM	KHAM	BRUM	DU

Color	of	goddess	and	syllables:	radiant	yellow-gold

Organ:	spleen

In	right	and	left	hands:	counterclockwise	swastika	(unchanging	truth)	and	healing	vase

Right	and	left	hands	of	goddess	in	the	organ:	counterclockwise	swastika	and	healing	vase

	

Qualities:	strength,	steadiness,	security,	groundedness,	focus,	connection

Spiritual	development:	overcoming	ignorance,	increasing

wisdom	Wisdom:	wisdom	of	equanimity

Image:	powerful,	solid	mountains

Element:	Water

Mantra	for	transformation:	A	MAM

Mantra	of	the	goddess:	MAM	DANG	RA	MAM	TING	DU

Mantra	of	all	the	elements	combined:	A	YAM	RAM	MAM	KHAM	BRUM	DU

Color	of	goddess	and	mantra:	luminous	blue

Organ:	kidneys	(goddess	in	each)

In	right	and	left	hands:	victory	banner	with	crocodile	and	healing	vase

Right	and	left	hands	of	goddess	in	the	organ:	wish-fulfilling	jewel	and	healing	vase

Qualities:	calm,	comfortable,	sensuous,	relaxed,	peaceful,	flowing

Spiritual	development	and	wisdom:	overcoming	jealousy,	increasing	openness

Wisdom:	mirror-like	wisdom



Image:	vast,	calm	lake

Element:	Fire

Mantra	for	transformation:	A	RAM

Mantra	of	the	goddess:	RAM	TSANG	TANG	NE	RAM	DU

Mantra	of	all	the	elements	combined:	A	YAM	RAM	MAM	KHAM	BRUM	DU

Color	of	goddess	and	mantra:	luminous	red

Organ:	liver

In	right	and	left	hands:	lighting	bolt	and	skull

Right	and	left	hands	of	goddess	in	the	organ:	flame	and	vase

Qualities:	energy,	warmth,	strong	will,	inspiration,	creativity,	bliss

Spiritual	development:	inner	fire,	overcoming	desire	and	greed,	increasing	generosity

Wisdom:	discriminating	wisdom

Image:	fiery	volcano

Element:	Air

Mantra	for	transformation:	MA	YAM

Mantra	of	the	goddess:	YAM	YAM	NI	LI	THUN	DU

Mantra	of	all	the	elements	combined:	A	YAM	RAM	MAM	KHAM	BRUM	DU

Color	of	goddess	and	mantra:	luminous	green

Organ:	lungs	(goddess	in	each)

In	right	and	left	hands:	waving	wind	flag	and	vase

Right	and	left	hands	of	goddess	in	the	organ:	green	air	wheel	and	vase

Qualities:	flexibility,	liveliness,	freshness,	quickness

Spiritual	development:	overcoming	pride,	increasing	peacefulness

Wisdom:	all-accomplishing	wisdom

Image:	fresh	wind	through	the	valley	and	across	the	mountains

Element:	Space

Mantra	for	transformation:	MA	A

Mantra	of	the	goddess:	A	MU	YE	A	KAR	A	NI	A

Mantra	of	all	the	elements	combined:	A	YAM	RAM	MAM	KHAM	BRUM	DU

Color	of	goddess	and	mantra:	luminous	white	or	clear

Organ:	heart

In	 right	 and	 left	 hands:	wish	 fulfilling	 jewel	 and	 skull	 filled	with	 red	 and	white	 seminal
essences

Rather	 than	 a	 goddess,	 in	 the	 central	 channel	 at	 the	 heart	 level	 is	 a	 luminous	white	A
radiating	the	five	pure	lights.	From	this	the	other	goddesses	emanate	and	travel,	and	to
this	they	return	and	empty	the	elemental	essence	into	the	heart.

Qualities:	spaciousness,	ease,	clarity,	expansiveness,	vastness



Spiritual	development:	overcoming	anger,	increasing	love

Wisdom:	wisdom	of	emptiness

Image:	vast	open	sky	over	the	desert	or	plains

THE	PRACTICE	IN	DAILY	LIFE

It’s	best	to	work	with	all	five	elements,	one	after	the	other,	but	if	that	is	too	much,	practice
with	 the	element	you	most	 feel	needs	 to	be	 strengthened.	Try	 to	develop	a	 relationship
with	the	goddesses.	The	strength	of	the	practice	does	not	depend	on	perfect	visualization
or	 the	use	 of	 perfect	words.	What	 is	 important	 is	 to	 have	 an	 experience	 of	 the	positive
elemental	 qualities	 and	 to	 learn	 to	 use	 the	 elements	 for	 healing.	 As	 the	 qualities	 are
retrieved,	feel	your	body,	energy,	and	mind	becoming	stronger	and	more	balanced.

The	practice	can	be	done	as	part	of	your	daily	schedule,	as	a	personal	or	group	retreat
practice,	 or	 at	 any	 time	 that	 you	 feel	 it	 would	 be	 helpful.	 The	 text	 suggests	 that	 the
practice	be	done	intensively	on	a	re	treat	of	twenty-one,	fourteen,	or	seven	days’	duration.

According	to	 the	text,	 the	 individual	elements	are	strongest	during	particular	periods	of
the	day	and	night.	If	you	wish	to	augment	your	practice	you	can	work	with	each	element
during	the	time	that	it	is	strongest:

Space:from	dawn	to	sunrise

Fire:	from	sunrise	to	midmorning

Earth:	from	midmorning	to	midday

Air:	from	midday	to	sunset

Water:	from	sunset	until	all	stars	are	visible	in	the	night	sky

Many	centuries	ago,	 it	was	written	 in	one	of	 the	Tibetan	 texts	 that	 the	biggest	obstacle
humans	face	on	the	spiritual	path	is	their	tendency	to	be	too	busy.	It’s	hard	to	think	of	the
world	of	 yak	herders	as	busy	compared	with	our	modern	world	 in	which	 there	are	 jobs
and	 cars	 and	paperwork,	 email	 and	phones	 and	 faxes,	 televisions	 and	 shopping	 centers
and	newspapers.	But	it	is	our	nature	to	fill	time,	to	fill	in	the	spaces	in	our	lives,	and	then
to	complain	that	we	have	too	much	to	do.	For	some,	adding	spiritual	practice	to	life	seems
to	be	just	another	thing	that	we	have	to	fit	 into	our	schedules.	But	it	doesn’t	have	to	be
like	that.

As	long	as	we	breathe,	we	can	practice.	If	nothing	else,	we	can	inhale	what	is	positive	and
exhale	what	 is	 harmful.	We	 can	 remain	mindful	 and	 practice	 kindness	 and	 compassion.
These	take	no	time	away	from	anything	else.	Similarly,	we	can	practice	with	the	elements
at	any	time,	in	any	place.

If	 you’re	 out	 of	 balance,	 call	 on	 the	 energy	of	 the	 element	 that	 is	 needed	 to	 rebalance.
Before	meals,	offer	the	food	to	the	first	and	second	guests.	Offer	the	leftovers	to	the	third
and	 fourth	guests.	Spend	 time	 feeling	connected	 to	 the	grounded	earth,	and	maybe	 the
next	day	 to	 the	 spacious	 sky.	Stay	 connected	 for	 a	week	 to	 the	 comfort	 of	water	or	 the
flexibility	of	air	or	the	creativity	of	fire.

The	 elements	 can	 be	 approached	 in	 nature	 or	 through	 visionary	 connection	 to	 the
elemental	goddesses.	When	the	connection	is	firm	and	the	experience	of	the	elements	is
vivid,	 there	 are	 endless	 possibilities	 for	 healing	 and	 generating	 positive	 qualities,	 for
overcoming	negativities	and	obstacles,	and	for	progressing	on	the	spiritual	path.



THREE

THE	FIVE	ELEMENTS	IN	TANTRA
In	tantra,	the	focus	on	the	elements	is	mainly	in	terms	of	their	manifestation	as	the	vital
energies	in	the	body.	They	are	not	reduced	to	biological	or	psychic	energies,	though	both
these	energies	are	manifestations	of	them.

The	 elements	 are	 understood	 to	 be	 the	 sacred,	 fundamental	 energies	 of	 existence
encountered	 in	 the	 energetic	 dimension	 of	 the	 individual.	 Rather	 than	 being	 accessed
through	the	raw	natural	elements	or	through	relationships	with	non-physical	beings,	as	in
the	 shamanic	 tradition,	 the	 elemental	 energies	 are	 accessed	 in	 the	 practitioner’s	 own
body	as	the	channels,	pranic	energi	es,	seminal	essences,	and	sacred	seed	syllables	of	the
energy	body.	In	tantra,	these	practices	lead	ultimately	to	the	accomplishment	of	the	body
of	the	deity,	which	is	not	a	goal	in	shamanism.

The	shamanic	view,	however,	is	not	excluded	from	tantra.	The	Mother	Tantra,	for	example,
says	that	if	a	person	seems	to	be	possessed	consistently	by	one	strong	emotion,	it	is	likely
that	 the	person	 is	beset	by	demonic	 forces.	 If	 the	person	 intermittently	experiences	 the
negative	emotion,	this	is	probably	due	to	an	energetic	imbalance.	When	the	person	is	not
affected	 by	 negative	 emotions,	 it	 means	 that	 the	 different	 elemental	 energies	 are
balanced.	 In	 Tibetan	 traditions,	 shamanic	 and	 tantric	 practices	 and	 teachings	 are
comfortably	integrated	with	each	other.

Tantra	 is	 the	 path	 of	 transformation.	 The	 five	 negative	 emotions—correlated	 to	 the	 five
elements—are	 transformed	 into	 five	 positive	 qualities:	 anger	 into	 love,	 greed	 into
generosity,	 jealousy	 into	 openness,	 pride	 into	 peace,	 and	 ignorance	 into	 wisdom.	 The
suffering	 being	 is	 transformed	 into	 the	 enlightened	 buddha.	 Even	 the	 physical	 body	 is
transformed	into	a	body	formed	of	light.

Tantric	 practice	 is	 broadly	 divided	 into	 two	 levels	 of	 practice:	 the	 generation	 stage
practices	and	the	completion	stage	practices.	The	practices	I	am	describing	here	are	from
the	latter,	which	generally	have	to	do	with	yogas	involving	the	body.	To	understand	these
practices	it	is	necessary	to	have	some	understanding	of	the	energetic	anatomy	of	the	body.

THE	HORSE,	PATH,	RIDER,	AND	ARMOR

The	metaphor	of	the	horse,	path,	rider,	and	armor,	found	in	the	Mother	Tantra,	helps	us
understand	the	components	of	the	practice	and	the	relationships	between	them.	The	horse
is	 the	prana	 (lung).	The	path	represents	 the	channels	 in	 the	body	 (tsa).	The	rider	 is	 the
sphere	(tigle;	Skt:	bindu),	the	mind	or	consciousness	aspect.	And	the	armor	is	the	syllable
(yi	ge)	or	symbol.

THE	HORSE:	PRANA

The	Tibetan	word	 for	 the	 vital	 energy	 is	 lung,	 but	 I	will	 use	 the	widely	known	Sanskrit
word,	prana.	Prana	is	the	energy	that	powers	and	is	the	substance	of	all	things	material
and	 immaterial.	 It	 is	 the	 fundamental	energy	 from	which	all	 things	arise,	 t	he	energy	of
the	 kunzhi,	 the	 basis	 of	 existence.	 At	 its	 most	 subtle	 level	 it	 is	 undifferentiated,	 non-
localized,	and	non-dual.	Its	first	discrimination	is	into	the	five	pure	lights	of	the	elements,
which	are	too	subtle	for	us	to	perceive	with	our	ordinary	minds.	However,	we	can	sense
prana	directly	at	the	grosser	levels	in	the	air	we	breathe.	We	can	also	sense	its	flow	in	our
bodies.	It	is	at	this	level,	in	which	prana	can	be	felt	both	in	its	movement	and	its	effects,
that	we	work	in	tantra.	We	become	sensitive	to	and	develop	the	flow	of	prana	using	mind,
imagination	,	breathing,	posture,	and	movement.	By	guiding	the	grosser	manifestations	of
prana,	 we	 can	 affect	 more	 subtle	 levels.	 As	 our	 sensitivity	 increases,	 we	 can	 directly
experience	prana	in	subtler	dimensions.

Prana,	 in	general,	 is	related	to	the	air	element.	This	 is	the	element	closest	to	space,	the
first	 to	 arise	 from	 space,	 and	 the	 last	 to	 dissolve	 into	 the	 base	 at	 death.	 It	 pervades
everything	and	everywhere.	When	we	talk	about	the	five	elements	as	five	pranas,	we	are
talking	 about	 the	 fire	 and	 air	 aspects	 of	 each	 of	 the	 elements.	 As	 I	 wrote	 earlier,	 one
formulation	 of	 the	 elements	 in	 the	 body	 has	 the	 flesh	 as	 earth,	 the	 blood	 as	water,	 the
metabolic	heat	as	fire,	the	breath	as	air,	and	the	consciousness	as	space.	This	is	thinking
of	the	elements	in	their	earthier	aspect—the	more	substantial,	more	physical	aspect	of	the
manifestation	 of	 the	 elements	 in	 the	 body.	 The	 five	 pranic	 energies	 are	 the	 airy,	 less



substantial	manifestations	of	the	elemental	energies	in	the	body.

THE	FUNCTIONS	OF	THE	FIVE	PRANAS

The	five	primary	energy	flows	in	the	body	are:	the	upward-moving	prana,	related	to	earth;
the	 life-force	 prana,	 related	 to	 space;	 the	 fire-like	 prana,	 related	 to	 fire;	 the	 pervasive
prana,	related	to	air;	and	the	downward-moving	prana,	related	to	water.

Upward-moving	prana

The	upward-moving	prana	activates	the	senses:	it	allows	us	to	see,	hear,	smell,	taste,	and
feel	through	touch.	It	is	also	the	energy	underlying	thought	and	cognition.	A	defect	in	the
senses	is	often	related	to	a	weakness	in	the	upward-moving	prana.	Many	people	who	have
done	these	practices	have	told	me	that	they	notice	improvements	in	memory	and	vision.
The	 upward-moving	 prana	 is	 related	 to	 the	 earth	 elemen	 t—which	 may	 seem
counterintuitive.	But	besides	activating	the	senses,	this	prana	also	vitalizes	the	brain,	the
earthy	aspect	of	the	senses	and	cognition.	Because	the	five	elements	underlie	everything
that	exists,	there	are	apparent	contradictions	when	looking	at	more	than	one	level	of	what
is	manifest.

An	 image	 is	 associated	 with	 each	 of	 the	 five	 types	 of	 prana,	 either	 relating	 to	 the
concentration	or	function	of	the	energy	in	the	body	or	representing	qualities	of	the	prana.
The	image	connected	to	the	upward-moving	prana	is	shaped	like	an	umbrella.	The	pranic
energy	 is	 strong	 in	 the	 throat	 chakra,	 and	 rises	 up	 and	 spreads	 out	 through	 the	 brain,
making	the	umbrella-like	shape.	It	is	yellow,	symbolizing	the	earth	element.

The	 upward-moving	 prana	 opens	 the	 throat	 and	 crown	 chakras	 as	 well	 as	 the	 central
channel.	 For	 this	 reason	 it	 is	 particularly	 related	 to	 spiritual	 experience.	 Without	 an
opening	of	the	upper	chakras	and	the	central	channel,	higher	spiritual	experience	is	not
supported	by	the	body.	Opening	the	crown	chakra	is	related	to	strong	experiences	of	bliss,
while	 opening	 the	 throat	 chakra	 is	 related	 to	 peace.	 Traditionally,	 the	ultimate	 external
sign	of	connection	 to	and	 integration	of	 the	upward-moving	prana	 is	 the	ability	 to	 jump
very	 high	 and	 to	 fly.	 Internally,	 the	 sign	 of	 full	 integration	 is	 the	 ability	 to	 rise	 above
negative	emotions	and	enter	upper	realms.

Life-force	prana

The	life-force	prana	is	concentrated	in	the	heart.	It	is	the	vitality	of	the	person.	When	the
life-force	prana	is	weak,	the	individual	is	frail.	When	it	is	absent,	death	results.	When	it	is
strong,	the	person	is	vital,	the	will	is	strong,	and	experience	is	vivid.

The	 image	associated	with	 the	 life-force	prana	 is	 the	white	or	 clear	wish-fulfilling	 jewel
centered	in	the	heart.	In	old	Tibetan	stories,	prayers	to	the	wish-fulfilling	jewel	result	in
desires	being	met—that	which	is	in	the	heart	becomes	manifest	in	life.	The	heart	and	life-
force	prana	are	associated	with	the	space	element.	When	the	life-force	prana	is	strong	and
the	 heart	 chakra	 is	 open,	 there	 are	 vivid	 experiences	 of	 clarity	 and	 vitality.	 When	 this
prana	is	deficient,	the	memory	grows	weak	and	the	mind	is	clouded.	The	life-force	prana
manifests	negatively	as	anger	and	hatred;	positively	as	strong	will,	happiness,	joy,	and	the
development	of	wisdom.	It	supports	vitality	in	life,	cognitive	functioning,	and	perception.

Traditionally,	 the	 ultimate	 sign	 of	 integration	 with	 the	 space	 element	 is	 the	 ability	 to
transfer	 consciousness	 into	 other	 bodies.	 This	 ability	 has	 resulted	 in	 many	 stories	 of
masters	who,	 facing	death	and	unwilling	 to	give	up	serving	others,	 locate	 the	body	of	a
recently	 dead	 young	 person	 and	 transfer	 the	 consciousness	 into	 it.	 Upon	 reviving	 the
younger	 body,	 the	 masters	 continue	 their	 work	 without	 loss	 of	 the	 memories	 that
originated	in	the	older,	now	abandoned,	body.

Fire-like	prana

Fire-like	 prana	 is	 the	 energy	 of	metabolism.	 It	 digests	 food	 and	 is	 strengthened	 by	 the
digestion	 of	 food.	 It	 controls	 the	 process	 of	 drawing	 nutrition	 from	what	 is	 eaten.	 It	 is
centered	 in	 the	 navel	 chakra	 and	 is	 responsible	 for	 the	 heat	 of	 the	 body.	 The	 image
associated	with	it	is	a	red	triangle,	point	up,	in	the	navel	chakra.

The	fire	in	the	navel	chakra	is	developed	in	practices	like	tummo—the	yoga	of	inner	fire.
When	refined	it	 is	the	basis	of	subtle	psychic	heat,	which	 is	associated	with	bliss.	There
are	many	kinds	of	bliss;	the	fire	prana	is	related	particularly	to	meditative	bliss,	to	the	joy
of	being.	This	is	a	joy	not	dependent	on	anything.	It	does	not	disappear	if	a	job	is	lost,	it



does	not	 increase	 if	 a	promotion	 is	earned.	 It	 is	 the	bliss	of	awareness,	of	 sensation,	of
existence.

A	deficiency	of	fire	prana	manifests	as	ignorance,	sleepiness,	dullness,	forgetfulness,	poor
digestion,	 or	 a	 lack	 of	 energy.	 The	 sign	 of	 an	 ultimate	 connection	 to	 fire	 is	 an
invulnerability	to	destruction	by	the	elements	and	the	ability	to	develop	dream	yoga–self-
awareness	in	the	dream	state–and	the	practice	of	the	clear	light.

Pervasive	prana

Pervasive	prana	moves	throughout	the	body.	It	is	connected	to	the	air	element.	Because	it
is	everywhere	in	the	body,	there	is	no	specific	image	that	reflects	its	concentration.

Pervasive	 prana	 is	 responsible	 for	 communication	 inside	 the	 body;	 it	 connects	 the
different	parts	of	the	body	energetically.	Nutrition	moves	from	the	intestines	to	the	rest	of
the	body;	blood	flows;	nerves	carry	information.	Touch	any	place	on	the	skin	and	there	is
sensation.	More	subtly,	focus	the	mind	on	any	part	of	the	body	and	there	is	sensation.	This
is	all	the	work	of	the	pervasive	prana.

Strong	pervasive	prana	allows	for	the	extension	of	experience,	positive	and	negative.	If	we
see	 a	 beautiful	 flower	 and	 feel	 the	 pleasure	 of	 that	 throughout	 our	 bodies,	 that	 is	 the
pervasive	prana.	When	we	feel	love	in	our	hearts	and	it	manifests	in	the	expression	on	our
faces,	 it	 is	 the	pervasive	prana	 that	 connects	heart	 and	 face.	 If	we	 feel	good	and	 share
that	with	our	friends,	that	is	positive	pervasive	prana.	If	we	feel	bad	and	dump	that	bad
experience	on	someone	else	and	make	them	feel	bad,	that	can	be	a	negative	manifestation
of	pervasive	prana.	Pervasive	prana	manifests	negatively	as	jealousy	and	the	wish	to	harm
others;	positively	it	produces	a	fast,	sharp	intellect.

Pervasive	 prana	 allows	 the	 effects	 of	meditation	 and	 other	 spiritual	 practices	 to	 spread
throughout	life.	Without	it,	we	may	have	good	experiences	but	they	remain	isolated.	When
most	developed,	pervasive	prana	can	bridge	time	and	space.	For	example,	when	a	strong
practitioner	 consciously	 chooses	 an	 incarnation	 after	 death,	 it	 is	 the	 power	 of	 the
pervasive	prana	that	allows	the	connection	from	this	life	to	the	next.

The	ultimate	 signs	of	 integration	with	 the	air	element	are	 the	abilities	 to	 transform	 the
body,	 to	 be	 present	 in	 more	 than	 one	 place	 at	 a	 time,	 and	 to	 have	 clairvoyance.
Development	 of	 the	pervasive	prana	 supports	 the	direct	 perception	 of	 emptiness	 and	 is
the	pranic	basis	of	bliss.

Downward-moving	prana

Downward-moving	 prana	 is	 connected	 to	 water.	 On	 a	 mundane	 level,	 it	 is	 the	 energy
behind	 orgasm,	 urination,	 bowel	movement,	 and	 erection.	When	 it	 is	 deficient	 all	 these
functions	can	be	impaired.	It	also	allows	us	to	eliminate	what	we	don’t	want	in	other	areas
of	our	lives.	It	is	represented	as	a	bellows	that	can	push	energy	down,	concentrated	in	the
secret	chakra	behind	the	sexual	organ.

Negatively,	 downward-moving	 prana	 manifests	 as	 attachment	 and	 lust.	 Positively,	 it
supports	being	grounded	and	stable.	Its	higher	function	is	to	generate	bliss	in	sex;	when	it
is	cultivated	and	integrated,	it	provides	the	ability	to	receive	yogic	power	through	tantric
sexual	union.	Through	 it	one	 is	able	 to	experience	the	union	of	bliss	and	emptiness,	 the
foundation	of	tantric	practice.

THE	PATH:	CHANNELS

Prana	moves	through	the	body	 in	channels.	There	are	said	to	be	84,000	channels	 in	the
body—or,	 alternatively,	 360,000—categorized	 as	 gross,	 subtle,	 or	 very	 subtle.	 The	 gross
channels	 are	 blood	 vessels,	 nerves,	 and	 the	 lymph	 system.	 The	 subtle	 channels	 are	 not
substantial	 but	 are	 energetic,	 like	 the	 meridians	 of	 the	 energetic	 circulation	 system
recognized	 in	acupuncture.	Very	subtle	channels	are	 the	paths	of	 the	very	subtle	prana.
They	cannot	be	detected	or	measured,	but	 can	be	experienced	directly	by	 the	naturally
sensitive	and	by	yogic	practitioners	who	develop	the	necessary	sensitivity.

Sometimes	when	I	teach	I	use	the	metaphor	of	a	house	to	explain	the	relationship	of	the
prana	and	the	channels:	The	house	is	the	body.	The	channels	are	the	wires	in	the	house
that	car	ry	the	electricity.	The	electricity	is	the	prana.	The	light	bulbs	are	the	senses.	The
appliances	are	 the	mechanical	 functions	of	 the	body.	 If	 the	prana	 is	deficient,	 the	bulbs
will	 not	 light	 or	 will	 be	 lit	 only	 dimly.	 The	 senses	 won’t	 work	 fully,	 or	 the	 mechanical



functions	of	the	body	will	be	defective,	or	the	thoughts	will	be	unclear.	If	the	channels	are
broken	or	damaged,	the	results	will	be	the	same.

Although	I	use	this	analogy,	it	is	a	mistake	to	think	of	the	subtle	and	very	subtle	channels
as	substantial	conduits	through	which	the	prana	flows.	To	imagine	them	in	a	way	that	is
closest	 to	 their	 actual	 nature,	 imagine	 them	 as	 paths	 of	 light,	 a	 network	 of	 light	 that
permeates	every	cell	of	 the	body.	Some	of	 the	channels	are	stronger	and	brighter,	some
are	smaller	and	dimmer.

There	are	 three	main	channels	used	 in	many	of	 the	yogic	practices:	 the	central	channel
and	 the	 two	 side	 channels.	 They	 were	 described	 in	 the	 directions	 for	 the	 purification
breathing	 in	 the	 section	 on	 shamanism	We	 visualize	 them	 in	 order	 to	 connect	with	 the
prana	moving	through	them.	Though	the	visualization	is	only	a	symbolic	image,	it	directs
our	attention	to	the	energy	that	is	actually	present	in	the	body.	I’ll	repeat	the	description
of	 the	 three	 channels	 here:	 The	 central	 channel	 is	 blue	 and	 rises	 straight	 through	 the
center	of	the	body,	beginning	about	four	finger-widths	below	the	navel;	it	is	the	width	of	a
thick	fountain	pen,	and	widens	slightly	from	the	heart	to	its	opening	at	the	crown	of	the
head.	The	side	channels	have	the	diameter	of	pencils	and	 join	the	central	channel	at	 its
base	below	 the	navel,	 in	 the	center	of	 the	body.	They	 rise	 straight	 through	 the	body	on
either	 side	 of	 the	 central	 channel,	 curve	 around	under	 the	 skull,	 pass	 down	behind	 the
eyes,	and	open	at	the	nostrils.	 In	women	the	right	channel	 is	symbolized	as	red	and	the
left	as	white.	In	men	the	right	channel	is	white	and	the	left	is	red.

Ordinarily	prana	flows	strongly	 in	the	side	channels.	This	 is	 the	karmic	prana.	 It	can	be
positive,	negative,	or	neutral,	and	underlies	all	normal	dual-istic	experiences,	which	are
also	positive,	negative,	or	neutral.	There	are	various	kinds	of	karmic	prana—in	this	book
we	are	concerned	with	the	five	primary	pranas	that	I	described	earlier.

The	central	channel	is	very	subtle.	In	it	flows	the	prana	that	is	the	energetic	aspect	of	the
non-dual	 awareness,	 rigpa.	 When	 the	 nature	 of	 reality	 is	 described	 in	 terms	 of	 two
inseparable	 aspects—form	 and	 emptiness,	 bliss	 and	 emptiness,	 or	 awareness	 and
emptiness—it	is	the	central	channel	that	represents	the	experience	of	the	inseparability	of
the	two	aspects	of	the	apparent	duality.

In	 the	yogic	practices	of	 the	subtle	winds	and	channels,	which	are	described	 in	detail	a
little	 later,	the	intention	is	to	open	the	major	chakras	and	bring	the	prana	from	the	side
channels	 into	the	central	channel.	Doing	this	coincides	with	the	mind	releasing	dualistic
misperceptions	 and	 abiding	 in	 the	 non-dual	 awareness	 of	 rigpa.	 This	 is	 why,	 in	 the
retrieval	 of	 the	 elements,	 the	 recovered	 energies	 are	 poured	 into	 the	 central	 channel.
When	the	prana	abides	in	the	central	channel,	the	practitioner	can	abide	in	the	nature	of
mind.	The	prana	and	the	mind	always	move	together;	there	is	no	mind	without	prana.

THE	RIDER:	TIGLE

In	many	tantric	practices,	a	tigle	(thig	le)	 is	visualized.	Tigle	 literally	means	“sphere”	or
“circle,”	and	this	is	what	is	visualized	in	the	practices:	a	sphere	of	light	either	sitting	in	a
chakra	or	moving	through	the	channels.	Tigle	represents	the	mind	aspect	of	experience.	It
is	 the	 rider	 of	 the	 pranic	 horse.	 There	 is	 a	 metaphor	 in	 the	 teaching	 related	 to	 the
relationship	between	the	mind	and	the	prana:	the	mind	is	a	lame	rider,	the	prana	a	blind
horse.	Without	the	mind,	the	prana	has	no	direction.	Without	the	prana,	the	mind	has	no
capacity	to	move.	They	function	as	a	unit.

A	visualized	tigle	may	represent	consciousness	or	a	quality	of	consciousness	or	both.	For
example,	 a	 tigle	 in	 the	 heart	may	 represent	 compassion;	 a	 tigle	moving	 up	 the	 central
channel	may	 	represent	non-dual	awareness;	a	 tigle	ejected	 from	the	crown	of	 the	head
may	 represent	 the	 person	 that	 leaves	 the	 body	 at	 death;	 and	 so	 on.	 In	 sleep	 yoga,	 for
another	example,	five	tigle	are	visualized	in	the	heart,	representing	the	five	goddesses	of
the	pure	elemental	essences,	the	five	pure	lights.	In	this	practice	the	visualization	is	only
of	spheres	of	light	representing	qualities	integrated	with	awareness.

THE	ARMOR:	SYLLABLES

In	 Tibetan	 practices	 the	 visualization	 of	 syllables	 is	 common.	 Syllables	 have	more	 form
than	the	pure	light	of	the	tigle	and	represent	more	distinct	qualities.	Syllables,	buddhas,
deities,	or	goddesses	are	often	visualized	inside	of	the	tigle.	They	are	similar	in	meaning
and	function,	and	every	deity	in	tantra	is	connected	with	a	“seed”	syllable	from	which	it
manifests	 and	 into	 which	 it	 dissolves.	 For	 example,	A	 can	 represent	 Kuntuzangpo,	 the
dharmakaya	buddha.	OM	or	HUNG	can	represent	a	sambhogakaya	buddha	such	as	Shenla



Odkar.	HUNG	can	represent	a	nirmanakaya	buddha	such	as	like	Tonpa	Shenrab	or	Yeshe
Walmo.	These	buddhas	are	characterized	by	specific	qualities	and	manifest	with	particular
purposes.	This	particularity	is	represented	by	the	syllable.	By	“represent”	I	mean	that	the
syllable	has	the	same		energetic	qualities	as	the	deity.

The	syllable	is	the	rider’s	(the	mind’s)	armor.	The	mind	focuses	on	a	particular	syllable	in
order	 to	 evoke	 a	 particular	 quality,	 bringing	 the	 quality	 into	 felt	 experience.	 The
experience	 is	already	 in	 the	mind	 in	potential	and	the	symbol	calls	 it	 forth	and	protects
the	 mind	 from	 straying.	 When	 the	 syllable	 is	 strongly	 visualized	 and	 the	 quality	 it
represents	brought	 into	 felt	 experience,	 the	 syllable	 is	 imbued	with	power	and	protects
the	practitioner	from	non-physical	negative	beings	encountered	on	the	visionary,	energetic
levels	 of	 experience.	 It	 is	 non-physical	 power;	 non-physical	 beings	 encountering	 it	 will
avoid	it.	Negative	forces	can	only	affect	us	if	they	find	a	weakness	or	vulnerability	through
which	they	can	harm	us.	The	activated	syllable	or	other	symbol	brings	the	strength	of	the
quality	it	represents	into	experience,	replacing	weakness	and	vulnerability.

In	Western	psychological	terms,	it	could	be	said	that	when	one	is	fully	engaged	with	the
syllable	and	the	quality	that	it	represents,	one	is	protected	from	one’s	own	negative	states
—depression,	 anxiety,	 and	 so	 on.	 However	 the	 mechanism	 is	 described,	 the	 syllable
functions	 as	 armor	 in	 the	war	 of	 negative	 emotions,	 in	 the	 battles	 led	 by	 the	 forces	 of
ignorance.	Without	armor,	in	this	kind	of	battle,	one	becomes	not	a	victim	of	the	war	but
the	war	itself.	That	is	how	the	samsaric	war	is	lost—by	becoming	it.

ASPECTS	OF	TANTRA

CHAKRAS

Chakra	 (khor	 lo)	 means	 “wheel.”	 Chakras	 are	 probably	 the	 most	 well-known	 aspect	 of
energetic	anatomy	in	the	West,	where	they	are	often	used	as	metaphors	for	psychological
or	spiritual	growth.	But	chakras	are	not	only	metaphors,	they	are	actual	energetic	centers
in	the	body.	A	chakra	is	simply	a	location	in	the	body	at	which	channels	cross.	As	there	are
thousands	 of	 channels,	 there	 are	 many,	 many	 chakras.	 However	 in	 spiritual	 and	 yogic
practice	 the	 focus	 is	 on	 the	 major	 chakras,	 the	 sites	 where	 many	 channels	 ormajor
channels	 cross.	 If	 we	 imagine	 many	 channels	 intersecting—the	 channels	 radiating	 out
from	 the	 intersection—it	 is	 easy	 to	 understand	why	 chakras	 are	 represented	 as	 spoked
wheels	or	as	a	wheel-like	shape	made	by	the	petals	of	a	lotus.

	

Many	 tantric	 practices	 require	 the	 practitioner	 to	 fix	 his	 or	 her	 atte	ntion	 in	 particular
chakras.	Because	prana	and	mind	always	move	 together,	 directing	 the	 attention	directs
prana;	the	movement	of	prana	cannot	be	divided	from	experience.	As	the	pranic	centers	in
the	 body,	 the	 chakras—in	 particular	 the	 six	 main	 ones—influence	 the	 quality	 of
experience.	Each	of	these	chakras	are	linked	to	the	experiential	qualities	of	one	of	the	six
realms	of	existence.

To	use	a	modern	analogy,	the	main	chakras	are	like	hard	drives,	one	for	each	of	the	main
realms	of	experience.	Each	hard	drive	has	many	files.	As	long	as	a	chakra	is	functioning—
and	 it	always	 is	 to	some	extent,	no	matter	how	“closed”	 it	may	be—one	of	 these	 files	 is
open.	What	is	displayed	by	that	file	shapes	experience.	In	sleep,	for	example,	if	we	do	not
remain	 aware,	 the	mind	 and	 prana	 are	 directed	 by	 karmic	 habit	 to	move	 to	 one	 of	 the
chakras,	which	means	that	the	attention	becomes	rooted	in	different	energetic	locations	in
the	body.	As	 it	does,	particular	 types	of	characteristic	experience	arise	which	determine
the	character	of	the	dream.	When	the	mind’s	focus	moves	to	another	chakra,	the	dream
changes.	 This	 normally	 happens	 without	 our	 conscious	 direction	 unless	 we	 are	 able	 to
guide	dreams.

In	the	yogic	practices	of	the	channels	and	prana,	we	open	the	channels	so	that	the	prana
can	 move	 without	 obstruction.	 We	 open	 the	 chakras	 and	 evoke	 positive	 experiences
associated	with	that	chakra.	In	the	hard	drive	analogy,	we	clear	the	screen	and	then	call
up	 the	 file	 that	contains	 the	positive,	supportive	qualities	 that	we	need	 for	 the	practice.
The	tigle	 is	the	mental	aspect,	the	consciousness	that	 is	focused	there	that	takes	on	the
quality	 that	 is	evoked	 in	 the	chakra,	as	a	crystal	ball	 takes	on	 the	color	of	 fabric	 that	 it
rests	upon.	The	syllable	is	both	the	password	that	evokes	the	quality	and	the	armor	that
sustains	it.

POSITIVE	AND	NEGATIVE



The	 positive	 and	 negative	 manifestations	 of	 the	 elements	 are	 experienced	 in	 the	 body.
Pleasure	and	discomfort,	dullness	and	agitation,	fatigue	and	vitality,	stress	and	relaxation,
happiness	and	misery—the	experience	of	these	is	always	rooted	in	bodily	sensation.	This
doesn’t	mean	 that	 the	mind	 is	completely	controlled	by	physical	states	or	 that	 the	mind
cannot	transform	negativity;	rather	it	 indicates	that	a	transformation	of	experience	from
negative	into	positive	or	positive	into	negative	always	includes	a	change	in	the	quality	of
bodily	 experience.	 This	 is	 one	 reason	 that	 tantra	 focuses	 on	 the	 body	 as	 a	 basis	 for
spiritual	growth.	It	is	also	why	tantra	can	contribute	a	great	deal	to	the	quality	of	life,	to
creating	more	health,	pleasure,	and	satisfaction	as	a	fortunate	benefit	of	progressing	on
the	spiritual	path.

In	sutra	t	he	nature	of	reality	is	described	in	terms	of	the	inseparable	union	of	emptiness
and	form	or	emptiness	and	vision.	In	Dzogchen,	it	is	awareness	and	emptiness.	In	tantra,
it	 is	 bliss	 and	 emptiness.	 Bliss,	 though	 not	 confined	 to	 physical	 sensation,	 is	 based	 in
sensation.

Tantra	 includes	 sexual	 practices	 that	 utilize	 the	 bliss	 of	 sexual	 experience.	 This	 has
resulted	in	a	misunderstanding	in	the	West	that	tantra	is	defined	by	sexual	practices.	But
tantra	goes	far	beyond	sexual	practices.	It	is	based	on	the	understanding	and	realization
of	emptiness,	the	fundamental	nature	of	all	phenomena.	Without	understanding	that	bliss
is	 empty,	 practices	 involving	 bliss	 are	 not	 tantric	 and	 the	 labeling	 of	 such	 practices	 as
tantra	is	misleading.

In	fact,	tantra	does	not	require	sexual	practice.	Tantric	practice	is	meant	to	transform	all
experience	 into	 bliss:	 all	 feelings	 in	 the	 body	 into	 bliss,	 all	 external	 vision	 into	 blissful
vision	 of	 the	 pure	 lands,	 all	 perception	 of	 other	 beings	 into	 perception	 of	 buddhas,	 all
sounds	 into	 sacred	 mantras.	 The	 practices	 are	 not	 about	 pretense.	 Practice	 leads	 to
control	over	perception	and	cognition,	and	freedom	from	negative	conditioning.	The	true
situation	of	things	is	modeled	in	the	imagination	and	developed	in	experience	in	order	to
overcome	 perceptual	 and	 cognitive	 distortion.	 The	 real	 situation	 is	 fully	 realized	 only
when	the	practitioner	stabilizes	in	the	nature	of	mind.	A	buddha	of	compassion,	love,	and
openness	can	manifest	in	the	heart	chakra,	as	can	a	demon	of	anger	and	jealousy.	All	of	us
have	positive	and	negative	experiences.	The	question	 is,	which	do	you	go	 toward?	With
which	 are	 you	 most	 familiar?	 What	 grabs	 your	 attention	 without	 your	 consent?	 What
thoughts	dominate	you?	It	may	be	that	you	are	surrounded	by	the	positive	but	you	don’t
see	 any	 of	 it.	 Instead	 you	 see	 all	 the	 reasons	 you	 should	 be	 depressed	 or	 angry	 or
disappointed.	How	you	see	determines	what	you	see	and	what	you	feel.

Tantric	 practice	 is	 particularly	 appropriate	 for	 working	 with	 the	 arising	 of	 negative
experience—but	one	must	neither	activate	nor	support	the	negative	behavior.	If	an	angry
thought	arises	and	we	react	with	strong	aversion—“Oh,	what	a	bad	 thought!”—we	have
not	resolved	anything.	But	if	we	let	the	negative	thought	arise	and	dissolve	in	awareness
with	neither	grasping	or	aversion,	or	we	use	the	event	as	a	reminder	to	come	back	to	a
practice—mindfulness,	 mantra	 recitation,	 visualization,	 or	 so	 on—then	 we	 are	 not
supporting	 the	 conditioning	 that	 leads	 to	 the	manifestation	of	 the	negative	 thought.	We
are	undercutting	it	and	weakening	the	karma	that	supports	it.

When	a	negative	emotion	arises,	its	nature	is	quite	pure.	It	is	energy,	an	experience	in	the
body	and	the	mind.	That’s	all.	It’s	not	substantial.	And	it	is	fleeting	unless	supported.	It	is
a	shimmer	of	 light	and	will	 transform	by	 itself.	Even	confusion	 is	clear	 in	 its	nature;	 it’s
only	when	we	have	a	problem	with	the	problem—and	either	grasp	at	it	and	continue	with
it	or	fight	with	it	and	try	to	push	it	away—that	the	negativity	is	supported.	Left	alone,	it
dissolves,	it	self-liberates.

SUPPORTING	POSITIVE	QUALITIES

We	do	practices	 to	 clear	 the	 channels	 and	open	 the	 chakras.	Then,	 in	 that	 opening,	we
generate	 positive	 qualities.	 If	 we	 don’t	 know	 how	 to	 protect	 the	 space	 and	 generate
positive	qualities,	whatever	habitually	characterizes	our	experience	will	return.

If	we	abide	in	non-dual	awareness,	there	is	no	need	for	protection	because	we	are	beyond
good	 and	 bad,	 beyond	 positive	 and	 negative.	 But	 if	 we	 abide	 in	 duality,	 positive	 and
negative	arise	in	us	as	habitual	experiences.	Enemies	are	usually	our	own	creation,	based
on	our	own	habitual	ways	of	seeing.

If	we	pay	attention	to	how	much	support	we	have	in	life,	we	find	more	and	more.	We	can
dislike	our	neighbor	or	we	can	realize	that	having	a	neighbor	supports	our	safety	and	our



sense	of	community.	There’s	a	great	deal	supporting	us	but	too	oft	en	it	is	overlooked.	An
entire	world	structure	supports	us	by	growing	food,	getting	it	to	us,	and	providing	medical
care,	physical	protection,	buildings,	roads,	and	schools.	We	may	not	like	all	of	it,	but	if	we
see	nothing	but	problems,	problems	are	everywhere	we	look.	We	become	like	the	media,
where	only	bad	news	is	considered	to	be	newsworthy.

If	we	are	affected	like	this,	it’s	because	we	are	not	protected.	Positive	symbols	protect	the
mind:	 sacred	 images	 we	 keep	 in	 our	 houses,	 the	 practice	 beads	 (mala)	 we	 carry,	 the
prayers	or	mantras	we	recite.	These	keep	 the	mind	 turned	 to	 the	sacred.	This	 is	what	 I
mean	by	protection.

It	is	not	unusual	to	carry	a	photograph	of	someone	close	who	has	died.	Like	the	syllables
or	the	images	of	deities,	the	photograph	can	be	a	support	for	experience.	In	this	case,	the
photo	supports	the	experience	of	grief.	Of	course	this	isn’t	to	say	that	we	shouldn’t	grieve
—we	 should.	 It	 is	 a	 natural	 and	 necessary	 part	 of	 life.	 But	 it	 isn’t	 good	 to	 support	 the
experience	past	the	point	where	it	is	appropriate.	Death	is	the	inevitable	consequence	of
life,	but	sometimes	the	person	left	behind	never	recovers	while	the	person	who	died	has
already	gone	on.

We	know	how	to	support	the	negative.	When	something	bad	happens,	we	keep	repeating
the	 story.	 Gossip.	 Scandals.	 These	 stories	 get	 told	 again	 and	 again.	 Of	 course	 we’re
interested	in	scandals,	corruption,	wars,	and	so	on.	I’m	not	suggesting	that	we	pretend	we
are	 in	 a	 paradise,	 beyond	 suffering.	We’re	 in	 samsara,	 the	 realm	of	 suffering.	But	 I	 am
suggesting	we	use	symbols	to	keep	the	mind	turned	more	toward	the	sacred	than	toward
the	negative.	When	we	feel	weak,	scattered,	and	tired,	we	are	easy	targets	 for	negative
internal	 and	 external	 forces.	 Someone	 can	 say	 one	 word	 and	 we	 spiral	 into	 anger	 or
distress.	We’re	more	vulnerable	to	illness,	to	depression,	to	negative	forces	in	general.	All
this	may	be	because	our	prana	 is	weak	or	our	minds	are	holding	a	negative	symbol.	We
may	be	 repeating,	 “It’s	 all	meaningless.	 The	world	 is	 a	mess	 and	 so	 am	 I.”	We	may	 be
reading	 about	 the	 latest	 atrocity,	 watching	 the	 newest	 movie	 about	 serial	 killers,
remembering	every	wrong	done	to	us	in	the	last	week.	This	is	how	we	hold	on	to	negative
symbols,	images,	and	thoughts.	When	we	do	this,	we	are	not	connected	to	the	pure	mind,
the	natural	state.	We	have	become	the	war	of	samsara.

The	yogic	practices	of	the	channels	and	prana	protect	us	by	giving	us	experiences	of	bliss,
clarity,	 stability,	peace,	and	comfort.	When	 the	energy	 is	moving	smoothly	 in	our	bodies
and	the	chakras	are	open,	everything	functions	better	in	us	and	in	our	experience.	We	are
naturally	 more	 positive.	 We	 see	 more	 possibilities	 and	 have	 more	 energy	 to	 overcome
obstacles.	Well-being	is	itself	a	kind	of	protection.	Modern	medicine	recognizes	that	stress
causes	many	illnesses	to	manifest.	In	the	same	way,	being	content	and	comfortable	in	our
bodies	 helps	 to	 prevent	 illness,	 and	 spiritual	 practice	 guards	 against	 the	 attack	 of	 both
inner	and	outer	negative	forces.

Here	 is	 an	 example	 of	 an	 informal	 practice	 that	 works	 with	 the	 chakras,	 tigles,	 and
syllables.	It	can	be	done	anytime	and	any	place.

Bön	 and	 Buddhism	 recognize	 six	 realms	 of	 cyclic	 existence.	 We	 have	 the	 seeds	 of
existence	 in	 each	of	 the	 six	 realms	 inside	 of	 us,	 stored	as	possibilities—karmic	 traces—
that	 will	 come	 to	 fruition	 when	 circumstances	 are	 appropriate.	 The	 karmic	 traces	 are
associated	with	particular	negative	emotions	and	particular	chakras:	the	hell	realms	with
hatred	and	anger	and	with	chakras	in	the	center	of	the	soles	of	the	feet;	the	realm	of	the
hungry	ghosts	with	greed	and	with	the	secret	chakra	that	is	just	behind	the	genitals;	the
animal	realm	with	ignorance	and	the	navel	chakra;	the	human	realm	with	jealousy	and	the
heart	chakra;	the	demi-gods	or	asuras	with	pride	or	arrogance	and	the	throat	chakra;	and
the	god	realms	with	pleasurable	distraction	and	the	crown	chakra.

There	are	complex	practices—such	as	the	Practice	of	the	Six	Lokas—undertaken	to	purify
the	karmic	traces	that	lead	to	rebirth	in	the	different	realms.	But	for	this	practice,	we	are
trying	to	purify	the	negative	emotions	connected	with	each	chakra	and	to	then	cultivate
the	positive	emotions	that	are	also	related	to	the	chakra.

Each	 chakra	 has	 different	 experiences	 related	 to	 it.	 Even	 with	 no	 specific	 preparation
these	can	be	experienced	to	some	extent	by	putting	the	attention	 in	different	areas.	Try
placing	your	attention	 in	 the	crown,	 then	 in	 the	secret	chakra	behind	 the	sexual	organ,
then	in	the	throat,	then	in	the	navel,	then	in	the	heart	area.	Note	the	different	qualities	of
experience	that	arise.



Now	visualize	the	syllable	A

in	each	chakra.	Just	as	a	buddha	can	appear	in	each	realm	of	existence,	even	the	lowest
realms	 of	 hell,	 the	 clear	 buddha-nature	 is	 inherent	 in	 all	 experience,	 even	 negative
emotions	like	hatred	and	greed.	A	represents	the	pure	basis	of	all	experience,	inseparable
emptiness	 and	 luminosity.	 The	 syllable	 is	 visualized	 in	 each	 of	 the	 six	major	 chakras	 in
order	to	keep	the	connection	to	the	buddha-nature	in	every	dimension	of	experience.

When	putting	the	attention	of	the	mind	on	a	chakra,	it	is	usual	to	visualize	a	tigle	there,	a
sphere	 of	 light.	 The	 tigle	 represents	 the	 quality	 of	 consciousness	 we	 are	 trying	 to
cultivate,	for	example	compassion	in	the	crown	chakra	(see	table	below).	Visualizing	the	A
inside	the	tigle	acts	as	armor.	It	isn’t	just	that	there	is	a	space	for	experience;	it	more	that
the	 experience	 is	 connected	 to	 what	 is	 represented	 by	 the	 A,	 which	 is	 the	 nature	 of
ultimate	reality.	The	syllable	protects	and	reminds	us	to	stay	connected	to	the	true	nature.
As	 long	as	 it	 is	kept	 there	by	 the	power	of	mindfulness,	as	 long	as	 the	awareness	stays
connected	 to	 the	base,	connected	 to	 the	natural	mind,	 the	negative	conditioning	cannot
reassert	itself.

When	you	are	connected	to	the	quality	most	associated	with	a	chakra,	using	mindfulness
to	maintain	 the	syllable	 in	 the	chakra	stabilizes	 the	experience	of	 that	quality.	Then	 the
quality	you	are	cultivating	can	be	constant	through	all	experiences.

Use	your	 imagination	as	 fully	as	possible	while	doing	 this	practice.	Pay	attention	 to	 the
sensual	 aspects	 of	 the	 practice.	 Feel	 the	 channels	 becoming	 unblocked,	 the	 chakras
opening,	the	prana	moving	smoothly	throughout	the	body.

It	may	be	that	a	negative	emotion	arises	while	you’re	doing	the	practice.	That’s	all	right.
Let	 it	 arise	 and	 fade	 away.	 Don’t	 hold	 on	 to	 it	 and	 don’t	 repress	 it.	When	 the	 emotion
dissolves,	integrate	awareness	with	the	space	in	which	it	dissolved.	What	is	there?	Space.
The	 empty	 essence.	 The	 base.	 Recognize	 the	 fact	 that	 space	 and	 awareness	 are
integrated,	 are	 inseparable.	 But	 don’t	 do	 this	 just	 intellectually—become	 that
inseparability	of	emptiness	and	awareness.	When	you	are	present	 in	awareness	and	not
fixed	on	something	arising	in	space,	there	is	a	great	spaciousness.	This	is	the	experience
of	the	opening.	In	the	space	of	the	opening,	develop	the	positive	qualities.

CORRELATION	OF	CHAKRAS	WITH	QUALITIES	AND	REALMS
Chakra Negative	Emotion Positive	Quality Realm
Crown Pleasurable	Distraction Compassion God	(Deva)
Throat Pride Peacefulness/Humility Demi-god	(Asura)
Heart Jealousy Openness Human
Navel Ignorance Wisdom/Clarity Animal
Secret Greed Generosity Hungry-ghost	(Preta)

Soles	of	the	Feet Hatred/Anger Love Hell

It	may	be	easier	in	the	beginning	to	do	this	practice	in	a	shrine	room	or	a	beautiful	place
in	nature,	 perhaps	 even	with	 a	 group.	 The	more	 support	 there	 is,	 the	 easier	 it	 is	 to	 do
practice.	When	practice	becomes	difficult,	find	that	which	supports	the	positive	qualities
and	intentions.

Use	 the	 table	above	as	a	basis	 for	practice.	 If	 you	are	working	on	developing	a	 certain
quality—let’s	say	clarity—focus	on	 the	associated	chakra,	 the	navel	chakra.	The	same	 is
true	 if	 you	are	 trying	 to	 overcome	a	negative	quality—let’s	 say	pride	 and	arrogance.	 In
this	case,	visualize	the	throat	chakra.	Visualize	a	luminous	sphere	of	light	at	the	point	of
the	chakra,	and	in	the	center	of	that	sphere,	a	radiant	A.	You	can	visualize	the	chakras	all
at	once	or	one	after	another,	or	you	can	work	with	only	one	for	as	long	as	you	wish,	days
or	even	weeks.	You	must	find	what	works	for	you,	so	experiment.



THE	PRACTICE	OF	TSA	LUNG

The	 following	 practices	 are	 not	 difficult	 but	 they	 should	 be	 done	 correctly.	 The	 correct
posture	and	use	of	the	breath	are	important.	Although	it	is	easy	to	simply	explain	how	 to
do	 the	physical	movements,	 it	 is	more	helpful	 to	explain	why	 so	 that	 the	understanding
can	be	applied	to	other	practices.

POSTURE

Almost	everyone	thinks	of	meditation	as	something	to	do	sitting	on	the	ground	with	legs
crossed.	Tibetans	practice	this	way	as	do	the	followers	of	Zen,	Theravada,	and	Hinduism.
But	why?	It	isn’t	just	due	to	a	shortage	of	chairs.	There	are	good	reasons	to	sit	this	way.

The	 posture	 is	 taught	 in	 terms	 of	 five	 points.	 The	 first	 is	 to	 cross	 the	 legs	 to	 keep	 the
pranic	 energy	 circulating	 back	 to	 the	 trunk	 of	 the	 body,	 to	 the	 secret	 chakra.	 This
promotes	 the	generation	of	 	 subtle	 internal	heat.	The	second	 is	 to	 fold	 the	hands	 in	 the
position	of	equipoise,	one	upon	the	other	in	the	lap.	In	our	tradition	both	hands	are	palm
up,	the	left	hand	resting	on	top	of	the	right.	The	hands	are	tucked	against	the	low	belly,	at
the	 level	 of	 the	 chakra,	 four	 finger-widths	 below	 the	 navel.	 Like	 the	 crossed-legs,	 this
keeps	the	energy	from	being	dispersed.	The	third	is	to	keep	the	spine	straight,	not	hyper-
extended	 or	 rigid	 or	 slumped	 or	 bent.	 This	 keeps	 	 the	 channels,	 particularly	 the	 three
main	ones,	straight	and	open	so	that	the	prana	can	flow	smoothly	and	easily.	The	fourth	is
to	pull	the	jaw	slightly	down	and	in,	which	lengthens	the	back	of	the	neck	and	helps	quiet
thought.	The	fifth	point	is	to	keep	the	chest	open,	which	aids	breathing	and	helps	open	the
heart	chakra.

To	really	discover	the	meaning	in	all	this,	pay	attention	to	your	own	experience.	When	you
arrange	 your	 body	 in	meditation	 posture,	 how	 does	 it	 affect	 you?	When	 you	 straighten
your	back,	what	happens	to	your	thoughts	and	emotions?	Does	keeping	your	gaze	upward
during	 meditation	 generate	 a	 different	 experience	 then	 when	 the	 gaze	 looks	 down?
Knowing	 what	 to	 pay	 attention	 to	 internally	 helps	 to	 develop	 the	 experience	 and	 the
benefits	of	the	practice.

BREATH	AND	PRANA

Spiritual	and	yogic	traditions	around	the	world	use	the	breath.	Not	only	does	it	bring	us
the	 oxygen	we	 need	 to	 live	 and	 rid	 us	 of	 waste	 produced	 by	metabolic	 activity,	 it	 also
revitalizes	us	with	subtle	pranic	energies.	It	 is	the	focus	of	attention	in	many	meditative
traditions	and	is	manipulated	in	most	yogic	practices.	Just	as	the	physical	body	is	a	gross
form	of	light,	the	breath	is	a	gross	form	of	prana	that	we	can	guide	in	our	body.	Working
with	 the	 breath,	 we	 guide	 the	 subtler	 levels	 of	 prana	 that	move	 beneath	 or	 inside	 the
breath.

In	 the	 following	 practices,	 the	 breath	 is	 divided	 into	 four	 parts:	 inhaling,	 re-inhaling,
holding,	exhaling.

Inhaling

When	 inhaling	 during	 the	 practice,	 open	 the	 body	 fully.	 Feel	 that	 you	 are	 welcoming,
accepting	with	joy,	what	enters.	Imagine	the	person	yo	u	love	most	in	the	world	coming	to
your	 front	 door	 after	 an	 absence;	 that	 is	 the	 feeling	 to	 bring	 to	 the	 inhalation.	 Invite,
welcome,	appreciate.

Re-inhaling

After	inhaling,	hold	the	breath	for	a	moment,	and	then	“re-inhale.”	What	I	mean	by	this	is
that	you	inhale	again	without	exhaling	first,	thus	filling	up	the	remaining	capacity	of	the
lungs.	We	rarely	 inhale	 to	 the	 fullest	extent;	 re-inhaling	completes	 the	 inhalation.	When
re-inhaling,	 try	 to	 experience	 the	 body	 filling	with	 spiritual	 nectar,	with	 blessings,	with
bliss	that	radiates	from	the	breath	and	pervades	the	body.

Holding

After	completing	the	inhalation,	hold	the	breath	for	the	duration	of	the	exercise.	Holding
the	breath	is	meant	to	generate	internal	heat,	internal	energy,	internal	fire.	Feel	this	fire,
imagine	the	heat	moving	throughout	the	body.

In	 four	 of	 the	 following	 five	 exercises	 (in	 the	 section	 on	 the	 Five	 External	 Tsa	 Lung



Practices)	the	breath	is	to	be	held	in	a	particular	part	of	the	body.	Holding	the	breath	in
an	area	is	a	way	to	keep	the	attention	there,	to	direct	the	prana	and	concentrate	it	in	one
of	the	chakras.	Each	of	the	chakras	is	associated	with	particular	qualities	of	experience.
When	the	breath	 is	held	 in	the	area	of	a	chakra	and	then	released,	that	quality	 is	being
activated.	That	is,	by	opening	the	chakra	with	the	breath,	the	associated	quality	is	being
energetically	supported.

Exhalation

With	the	exhalation,	allow	whatever	negative	energy	or	stress	you	are	experiencing	in	the
moment	to	be	released.	It	leaves	your	body,	your	mind,	and	your	energy.	Exhale	whatever
hurts	you	or	no	longer	serves	you.

As	 a	 preliminary	 practice	 you	 can	 spend	 some	 time	 breathing	 according	 to	 these
instructions	without	doing	anything	else.	Inhale	with	a	sense	of	opening	the	body,	energy,
and	 mind	 and	 with	 a	 sense	 of	 welcoming	 and	 joy.	 Re-inhale	 and	 fill	 with	 a	 bliss	 that
pervades	 the	 body.	 Hold	 the	 breath	 and	 generate	 internal	 fire	 that	 supports	 the
experience	 of	 bliss	 and	burns	 away	 obstructions	 and	defilements.	 Purify	 by	 exhaling	 all
negativities	and	obscurations	as	smoke-colored	air.

Keeping	 the	 attention	 on	 the	 breath	 will	 make	 the	 practices	 more	 complete	 and	 more
effective.

TRANSFORMATION	IN	HOLDING	AND	RELEASING

The	 body	 is	 constantly	 engaged	 in	 taking	 in,	 holding,	 and	 releasing.	 This	 is	 true
concerning	food,	air,	prana,	knowledge,	and	experience.

Whenever	there	is	a	release	of	physical	substances	from	the	body,	there	is	relaxation	and
opening.	If	we	cry	after	holding	back	tears,	we	relax.	This	is	not	just	a	physical	effect;	the
sadness	or	whatever	emotion	is	also	released.	A	space	opens	in	experience.	We	can	forget
it	or	we	can	utilize	it	for	practice.	When	the	sadness	is	released,	there	is	a	subtle	joy	in	the
relaxation	that	ensues.	Find	that	joy	and	sustain	it.

Even	when	we	go	to	the	toilet	there	is	a	positive	effect	that	we	usually	don’t	think	about.
For	example,	remember	a	time	when	you	were	in	a	crowd	or	someplace	in	the	city	and	you
very	much	needed	to	go	to	the	bathroom.	And	maybe	you	finally	found	a	toilet,	but	there
was	 a	 long,	 slow	 line.	 	 And	 finally	 you	 reached	 the	 toilet.	 There	was	 a	 release,	 a	 small
experience	 of	 liberation	 or	 of	 freedom	 from	 tension.	 Even	 though	 this	 is	 only	 an
evacuation	of	waste	products	from	the	body,	there	is	a	change	in	the	quality	of	experience,
an	 opening	 and	 release.	 Understanding	 how	 to	 apply	 all	 experience	 to	 the	 path	 of
meditation,	you	can	use	such	moments.	Bring	them	into	awareness,	recognize	them,	learn
from	them,	and	use	them.

In	tantric	sexual	practices,	the	holding	and	releasing,	tension	and	relaxation,	build-up	and
orgasm,	are	used	the	same	way.	When	there	is	a	great	release,	there	is	the	opportunity	for
great	 joy.	 Tensions	 dissipate,	 the	 body	 relaxes.	 Let	 the	 mind	 relax,	 too,	 but	 not	 into
drowsiness;	let	it	dissolve	into	pure	awareness.

This	practice	isn’t	only	about	relaxation,	though	many	people	meditate	in	order	to	release
tensions.	Doing	this	is	all	right,	but	it’s	not	a	deep	use	of	meditation.	To	take	the	practice
further,	 look	 for	 the	 space	 after	 release	 and	 inhabit	 it	 fully	 with	 awareness.	 When	 we
understand	 this	principle,	we	can	apply	 it	 to	 every	breath.	Every	exhalation	 is	 an	entry
into	 the	 natural	 state	 of	 mind.	 Every	 inhalation	 is	 an	 opportunity	 to	 develop	 positive
qualities.

In	 ordinary	 life,	 release	 is	 sometimes	 violent	 or	 destructive.	 Anger	 can	 be	 released	 by
breaking	glass	or	yelling,	through	fighting	or	hateful	thoughts.	Althought	this	may	release
the	 tension	of	anger,	 it	 is	not	very	 skillful.	Behaviors	 like	 these	 reinforce	 the	anger	and
strengthen	the	conditioning	that	will	result	in	further	expressions	of	anger.

Really	 knowing	 how	 to	 practice	means	 transforming	 negative	 experience	 into	 the	 path.
Every	 negative	 experience	 allows	 for	 some	 kind	 of	 release	 into	 a	 more	 spacious
experience.	Use	your	knowledge.

INSTRUCTIONS

There	are	three	levels,	or	three	versions,	of	this	tsa	lung	practice:	external,	internal,	and



secret.	The	external	is	grosser—it	uses	stronger	physical	movements	that	make	the	breath
stronger.	The	inner	and	secret	are	progressively	less	physically	oriented.	The	external	 is
more	 about	 the	 body;	 the	 internal,	 about	 energy	 and	 prana;	 the	 secret,	 about	mind	 or
awareness.

Before	 any	 practice,	 do	 the	 nine-breath	 purification	 as	 explained	 in	 the	 section	 on
shamanism.	 If	 you	 know	 how,	 perform	 the	 Guru	 Yoga,	 take	 refuge,	 and	 generate	 the
motivation	to	practice	for	the	benefit	of	all	beings.	At	the	end	of	any	practice,	dedicate	the
benefit	and	merit	 from	the	practice	to	the	welfare	of	all	beings.	This	 is	how	to	keep	the
practice	aligned	with	the	path	to	enlightenment.

The	morning	is	a	good	time	for	these	practices.	Do	each	of	them	five	times,	three	times,	or
even	once.	The	practices		can	be	done	with	the	eyes	open	or	closed—experiment.	The	goal
is	to	do	the	practices	while	abiding	in	non-dual	awareness.

THE	FIVE	EXTERNAL	TSA	LUNG	MOVEMENTS

The	breathing

Inhale	with	a	sense	of	welcoming.	Breathe	in	all	positive	and	healing	qualities,	especially
any	you	lack.	Hold	the	breath	just	for	a	moment,	then	reinhale—fill	the	rest	of	the	lungs’
capacity—and	hold	the	breath.	With	the	exhalation,	all	negative	qualities	and	illnesses	are
expelled.

Upward-moving	prana

This	practice	is	related	to	the	earth	element.

Inhale	and	hold	the	air	in	the	throat	chakra,	concentrating	there.	Allow	the	throat	to	swell
with	 the	 held	 breath.	 Re-inhale,	 filling	 the	 lungs	 completely.	While	 holding	 the	 breath,
gently	 tilt	 your	 head	 down	 and	 forward	 and	 then	 slowly	 rotate	 your	 head	 five	 times
counterclockwise,	rolling	the	head	over	the	shoulder,	across	the	upper	back,	over	the	next
shoul	 der,	 and	 again	 down	 and	 forward.	 Be	 careful	 with	 your	 neck.	 Don’t	 strain	 or
overextend.	 If	 there	 is	 any	pain,	 use	 very	 small,	 gentle	 circles,	 keeping	 your	 jaw	 facing
forward.	Feel	the	vital	air	moving	up	from	the	throat	chakra	and	through	your	head	in	a
spiral,	 vitalizing	 the	 brain	 and	 the	 senses	 and	 activating	 the	 crown	 chakra.	 The	 crown
chakra	is	associated	with	the	white	tigle	and	with	bliss	in	tantric	practice,	so	pay	attention
to	 increased	 blissful	 feelings	 in	 the	 body.	 Still	 holding	 the	 breath,	 rotate	 the	 head	 five
times	clockwise.	This	makes	a	total	of	ten	revolutions	of	the	head	during	one	breath,	five
in	each	direction.

Upward-moving	prana



When	you	 finish	with	 the	rotations,	exhale,	 imagining	 the	breath	and	energy	moving	up
the	central	channel	from	the	throat,	spreading	out	through	the	brain	and	then	out	the	top



of	the	head.	As	the	breath	moves	through	the	brain,	imagine	it	vitalizing	and	healing	the
senses	and	the	brain	functions	and	activating	all	spiritual	capacities	related	to	the	throat
and	crown	chakras.	It	is	only	in	the	first	exercise	that	the	exhalation	is	through	the	crown
chakra;	in	the	other	exercises	the	exhalation	is	through	the	nose	and	mouth.

Hold	the	inhalation	throughout	the	exercise	and	exhale	only	at	the	end.	If	you	need	more
air	during	the	exercise,	do	short	re-inhalations.	If	that	is	not	enough,	rotate	the	head	three
times	in	each	direction	rather	than	five	and	slowly	build	up	to	five.

When	working	with	the	upward-moving	prana,	it’s	almost	impossible	to	be	depressed.	It	is
the	uplifting	prana,	the	opposite	of	depression.	Even	common	language	refers	to	“feeling
down”	or	“feeling	up.”	The	experience	of	the	practice	should	be	one	of	increased	clarity,
like	 reaching	 the	 top	 of	 a	 hill	 and	 looking	 out.	Notice	 the	 freshening	 of	 the	 senses,	 an
increase	in	light,	a	greater	wakefulness.	After	each	completion	of	the	exercise,	rest	with	a
relaxed	 and	 spacious	 mind.	 Allow	 your	 eyes	 to	 be	 open,	 gazing	 slightly	 upward.	 Don’t
chase	thoughts.	Don’t	push	thoughts	away.	If	you	know	the	nature	of	mind,	relax	in	it.	If
not,	 try	 to	 remain	 present,	 feeling	 all	 of	 your	 body	 as	 a	whole.	 Notice	 how	 experience
changes	as	a	result	of	the	practice	and	support	the	change.	Abide	in	presence	as	long	as
the	experience	stays	fresh	and	open,	and	then	repeat	or	move	to	the	next	exercise.

Life-force	prana

This	practice	is	related	to	the	space	element.

Inhale	and	hold	the	breath	in	the	chest,	concentrating	in	the	heart	chakra.	Re-inhale	while
maintaining	the	attention	in	the	heart	chakra	and	expand	the	chest	completely.	Hold	the
breath	throughout	the	practice.

Place	your	left	hand	on	your	left	hip,	fingers	forward	and	thumb	to	the	back;	lift	your	right
arm	out	to	the	side	and	up	until	it	is	about	45	degrees	from	the	vertical,	with	the	fingers
extended	straight	out	in	the	same	direction.	(To	help	with	this,	imagine	that	12	o’clock	is
directly	overhead,	six	o’clock	directly	below	you.	For	this	exercise,	fully	extend	the	arm	so
that	 it	 is	 pointing	 to	 one-thirty.)	Holding	 your	 breath,	move	 the	 hand	 and	 arm	 forward,
curling	the	fingers	over	the	thumb,	index	finger	first,	to	make	a	loose	fist.	The	arm	then
draws	a	circle	in	the	air	above	the	head.	(Pretend	that	you	are	twirling	a	lasso	overhead
and	you	will	find	the	correct	movement	of	the	arm.)	As	the	hand	moves	over	the	crown	of
the	head,	the	fist	begins	to	open,	again	index	finger	first.	Continue	to	circle	the	hand	back
and	 then	 out	 to	 the	 side	with	 the	 fingers	 extended	 so	 that	 it	 is	 back	 in	 the	 position	 in
which	it	started.	This	is	one	rotation.	Do	this	rotation	five	times	with	the	right	hand.

Life-force	prana





Then	lower	your	right	hand	until	it	holds	the	right	hip,	and	raise	the	left	arm.	Repeat	the
rotation	 with	 the	 left	 hand	 but	 in	 the	 opposite	 direction—from	 extended	 to	 the	 side,
toward	the	front,	over	the	crown,	toward	the	back,	and	then	out	to	the	side	again.	Do	this
five	times.

While	rotating	the	arm,	stretch	the	chest	open	and	move	all	the	muscles	of	the	chest	and
upper	back.	When	the	hand	is	extended	out	to	the	side,	the	shoulder	should	be	stretched
fully	 toward	the	hand.	When	the	hand	moves	to	the	front	of	 the	body	and	then	over	the
head,	keep	the	elbow	extended	out	to	the	side;	don’t	collapse	the	chest.

Still	holding	the	same	breath,	lower	the	left	hand	to	hold	the	left	hip.	Holding	both	hips,
fingers	 to	 the	 front	 and	 thumbs	 in	 back,	 rotate	 the	 chest.	 The	 focus	 is	 on	 rotating	 the
heart	chakra;	 the	 torso	 follows	 that	movement.	Try	 to	 rotate	 the	chest	perpendicular	 to
the	ground,	 five	times	 in	one	direction,	 five	times	 in	the	other.	The	rotation	of	the	chest
will	 follow	 a	 circular	 motion:	 down,	 right,	 up,	 left,	 down–five	 times—and	 then	 reverse.



Imagine	 bringing	 the	 heart	 chakra	 down	 to	 the	 ground	 as	 much	 as	 possible	 without
bending;	then	move	it	as	far	as	possible	to	one	side;	then	up	as	high	as	possible;	then	as
far	as	possible	 to	 the	other	side;	and	back	down.	Make	the	movement	 large	so	that	you
stretch	the	muscles	of	the	chest	and	back.	Feel	as	if	the	heart	center	is	rotating	and	your
body	is	simply	following.

After	you	have	finished	the	ten	rotations,	exhale	through	the	nose	and	mouth	and	feel	the
prana	pervade	the	body.	Sit	in	a	relaxed	posture.	Let	the	mind	dissolve	in	pure	presence.
Rest	 in	that	until	 the	experience	of	clear	presence	dims.	Then	repeat	or	move	on	to	the
next	exercise.

Fire-like	prana

This	practice	 is	 related	 to	 the	 fire	element.	There	 is	always	heat	 in	 the	area	behind	 the
navel,	 the	center	of	digestion	and	metabolic	heat.	The	navel	chakra,	situated	behind	the
navel	in	the	center	of	the	body,	is	the	seat	of	the	fire-like	prana.

Fire-like	prana

Inhale	 and	 hold	 the	 air	 in	 the	 belly,	 concentrating	 in	 the	 navel	 chakra,	while	 doing	 the
kumbaka	 or	 “vase	 retention”	 exercise.	 This	 entails	 lightly	 tensing	 the	 muscles	 of	 the
perineum	and	anus,	pulling	up	the	pelvic	floor.	At	the	same	time,	the	diaphragm,	the	sheet
of	muscle	placed	like	a	floor	under	the	bottom	of	the	rib	cage,	tightens	and	pushes	down.
The	breath	is	held	between	the	pelvic	floor	and	the	diaphragm	as	if	being	compressed	in
the	 navel	 chakra.	 Don’t	 allow	 the	 throat	 to	 feel	 closed.	 Re-inhale	 and,	 maintaining	 the
focus	and	kumbaka,	let	the	vital	air	spread	internally,	as	if	filling	and	nurturing	the	whole
middle	of	the	body.

Holding	the	breath,	rotate	the	belly	five	times	in	one	direction	and	then	five	times	in	the
other.	The	rotation	is	horizontal,	parallel	to	the	ground,	like	the	turning	of	a	record	on	a
record	player.	Move	 the	 entire	 lower	 torso	 five	 times	 in	 a	big	 circle,	 counter-clockwise,
maintaining	 the	concentration	of	 the	held	breath.	Then	repeat	 in	 the	opposite	direction.
Focus	on	moving	the	belly	to	one	side,	then	back	to	touch	the	spine,	to	the	next	side,	then
far	forward.

Exhale	when	you	have	finished	the	rotations.	Abide	in	pure	presence.	Feel	the	openness	in
the	navel	area	and	the	increased	heat.	Relax	in	the	experience	until	it	loses	its	vibrancy,
then	repeat	or	move	on	to	the	next	exercise.

Pervasive	prana

This	practice	is	related	to	the	air	element.	The	pervasive	prana	is	everywhere	in	the	body.
The	breath	is	held	in	this	exercise	but	is	not	focused	in	a	particular	place.	Don’t	lock	the
throat	 or	 the	 pelvic	muscles—keep	 the	 body	 open.	 Feel	 the	 prana	 pervading	 each	 cell,
reaching	to	the	tips	of	the	fingers	and	toes	and	to	the	end	of	each	hair	on	your	head.

Inhale	and	place	your	hands	in	front	of	your	chest,	palm	to	palm	in	the	gesture	of	prayer.
Re-inhale	and,	keeping	the	elbows	close	to	the	body,	let	the	lower	part	of	the	arms	drop
down	so	that	they	extend	horizontally	from	either	side	of	the	body.	The	palms	are	facing
up.	 Holding	 the	 breath,	 clap	 the	 hands	 above	 your	 head,	 rub	 them	 against	 each	 other
briskly	 to	 generate	warmth,	 and	 then	massage	 your	whole	 body,	 particularly	 any	 areas



that	 feel	 blocked.	 Quickly	 massage	 the	 head,	 arms,	 chest,	 back,	 and	 legs,	 as	 if	 asking
every	cell	in	the	body	to	wake.

Still	holding	the	breath,	extend	the	right	arm	fully	from	the	right	side	of	your	body	as	if
holding	a	 large	bow.	Use	 the	 left	 hand	 to	draw	 the	 strong,	 imaginary	 string	of	 the	bow
back	across	the	body	to	the	left,	expanding	the	upper	torso	and	opening	the	chest.	Then
bring	 the	hands	 toward	each	other,	until	 they	almost	meet	 in	 front	of	 the	chest.	Do	this
rapidly	 five	 times,	 fully	 extending	 the	 right	 arm	 to	 the	 right,	 pulling	 back	with	 the	 left
hand,	feeling	the	stretch	across	the	chest.

Pervasive	prana



Then	extend	the	left	arm	fully	and	repeat	the	movement,	this	time	drawing	the	string	back
across	 the	 body	 with	 the	 right	 hand.	 Do	 this	 five	 times.	 Keep	 your	 face	 turned	 in	 the
direction	the	arrow	would	go.

During	all	this,	hold	one	breath.	Do	fewer	repetitions	if	necessary.	Don’t	 lock	the	breath
anywhere,	allow	it	to	pervade	the	body.	At	the	end,	exhale.	Pay	attention	to	the	sensation



that	pervades	the	body.	Rest	 in	that	experience	until	you	 lose	connection	with	pervasive
energy.	Then	repeat	or	move	on	to	the	next	exercise.

After	 this	 exercise,	 you	 will	 feel	 very	 clear	 and	 bright.	 The	 body	 feels	 alive,	 the	 flesh
awake.	There	is	joy	and	clarity.	Use	the	mind	to	support	and	extend	the	experience.	Relax
in	the	natural	state.

Downward-moving	prana

This	exercise	is	related	to	the	water	element.

Inhale	and	hold	the	air	 in	 the	area	of	 the	perineum,	between	the	anus	and	the	genitals,
concentrating	 in	 the	secret	chakra	behind	 the	sexual	organs.	Tighten	 the	perineum	and
anus,	 lightly	 pulling	 up	 the	 floor	 of	 the	 pelvis.	 In	 this	 exercise,	 do	 not	 tighten	 the
diaphragm	and	push	down;	 only	 pull	 up.	Re-inhale	while	maintaining	 the	 focus	 and	 the
hold,	and	concentrate	the	prana	in	the	secret	chakra.

With	legs	crossed	at	the	ankles,	right	leg	in	front	of	the	left,	knees	high,	use	both	arms	to
embrace	the	right	leg	at	the	level	of	the	knee.	Slowly	rotate	the	pelvis	towards	the	right
leg	and	back	five	times.	Then	embrace	the	left	leg	and	rotate	to	the	left	five	times.	Finally,
hold	both	knees	and	rotate	the	abdomen	five	times	in	one	direction	and	then	five	times	in
the	other	direction.	Through	all	this,	hold	the	breath	and	maintain	the	focus	in	the	secret
chakra.	Try	to	feel	that	you	are	rotating	on	the	chakra	itself.

Exhale	when	you	have	 finished.	Direct	 the	prana	downward	out	of	your	body	and	feel	 it
sink	 into	 the	 ground.	 Relax	 with	 your	 eyes	 open,	 gazing	 slightly	 upward.	 Rest	 in	 that
experience	until	it	loses	its	freshness.	Then	repeat	if	you	wish.	After	the	last	repetition,	try
to	 remain	 longer	 in	 the	 state	 of	 contemplation.	 Finish	 the	 practice	 period	 with	 the
dedication	of	merit.

The	Practice	in	Daily	Life

Though	the	practice	promotes	well-being	and	enhances	the	quality	of	life,	the	real	purpose
behind	 doing	 it	 is	 to	 support	 the	 experience	 of	 the	 nature	 of	 mind.	 Like	 the	 shamanic
practices,	 the	 tantric	 practices	 balance	 what	 is	 out	 of	 balance	 and	 develop	 what	 is
deficient.	 Unlike	 the	 shamanic	 practices,	 they	 are	 not	 usually	 done	 only	 to	 address	 a
specific	situation	or	condition	but	are	practiced	on	a	regular	basis.	By	practicing	regularly
we	 can	 keep	 the	 flow	 of	 energy	 open	 in	 the	 body.	 Then	 we	 will	 be	 neither	 dull	 nor
agitated,	 neither	 weak	 nor	 restless.	 This	 balance	 makes	 it	 much	 easier	 to	 practice
meditation.	 It	 helps	 clear	 the	mind	 and	 invigorate	 the	 body,	 supporting	us	 to	 recognize
and	abide	in	the	nature	of	mind.

Downward-moving	prana

THE	FIVE	INTERNAL	TSA	LUNG	PRACTICES

As	with	 any	 spiritual	 practice,	 learning	 the	 external	 form	 of	 the	 tsa	 lung	 is	 the	 easiest
part.	 Then	we	must	 learn	 how	 to	 generate	 and	 support	 the	 internal	 experience.	 Doing
yogic	practices	while	the	mind	is	wandering	doesn’t	produce	strong	results.	Therefore,	try



to	understand	what	each	part	of	the	practice	is	for,	its	purpose	and	method.	Stay	focused.

The	next	set	of	practices	has	the	same	intent	and	goal	as	the	previous	one.	Although	these
practices	are	called	internal,	they	involve	movements	of	the	body,	though	less	so	than	in
the	external	practice.	They	work	with	the	same	pranas	 in	 the	same	chakras	as	does	the
external	practice.

Upward-moving	prana

This	practice	opens	the	top	of	the	central	channel	and	the	throat	and	crown	chakras.

Inhale.	With	your	mouth	closed	,	pinch	your	nose	shut	and	blow	out	very,	very	gently,	as	if
clearing	your	ears	in	an	airplane	or	while	diving.	Be	very	careful	and	very	gentle	so	as	not
to	hurt	your	ears.	The	point	 is	not	to	clear	your	ears	but	to	use	the	 internal	pressure	to
direct	your	attention	to	the	crown	chakra.	As	much	as	possible,	experience	the	sensation
on	 the	 crown	 of	 your	 head.	 Use	 your	 imagination	 to	 concentrate	 the	 pressure	 in	 the
central	channel	and	to	feel	it	open	the	chakra.

If	 you	 don’t	 feel	 anything,	 just	 keep	 your	 attention	 fixed	 on	 the	 crown.	 Exert	 a	 slight
pressure	with	your	held	breath.

When	you	do	feel	the	sensation,	be	present	with	it.	Let	the	breath	become	natural.	Stay
focused	in	the	crown	chakra,	but	let	the	awareness	be	completely	open	and	free.

Exhale,	directing	the	prana	upwards	through	the	chakra.

Do	this	practice	any	time	you	wish,	but	particularly	when	feeling	down,	depressed,	or	dull;
when	feeling	that	you	don’t	have	the	strength	to	handle	the	tasks	you	need	to	do;	when
lacking	clarity	or	wakefulness;	and	when	distracted	or	confused.

Life-force	prana

The	life-force	prana	is	centered	in	the	heart	chakra.	Feel	your	heart	beat,	put	your	hand
on	your	chest	 if	needed.	Take	a	deep	breath,	 relax.	Then	 inhale.	 Imagine	 that,	with	 the
inhalation,	 light	 and	 positive	 energy	 stream	 toward	 your	 heart	 from	 all	 directions,
entering	the	heart	chakra	and	re-vitalizing	the	life-force	prana.	While	remaining	relaxed,
hold	the	breath	and	concentrate	it	in	the	heart	chakra	to	cultivate	the	energy	there.	Use
the	sensations	of	the	expanded	chest,	the	stretched	skin	and	muscles,	to	bring	your	focus
into	the	chest.	Exhale	slowly	and	gently,	and	relax	completely.	Repeat,	keeping	the	focus
on	the	heart	chakra	in	the	central	channel.	When	finished,	rest	in	the	experience	as	long
as	it	remains	fresh.

Do	this	practice	in	situations	similar	to	those	mentioned	for	the	upward-moving	prana	as
well	as	those	that	seem	to	be	draining	your	life-energy	and	vitality	or	causing	frustration
or	unhappiness.	The	exercise	supports	centered	awareness.

Fire-like	prana

The	fire-like	prana	is	concentrated	in	the	navel	chakra.	The	metaphor	used	in	this	practice
is	that	the	belly	is	an	ocean,	the	spine	is	the	rock	on	the	shore.	The	ocean	needs	to	flow	up
and	around	the	rocks	and	then	back.	Inhale,	hold	the	breath	while	pulling	the	belly	back
against	the	spine,	and	then	smoothly	release	with	the	exhalation.	Rest	in	pure	awareness.
Repeat.

This	practice	is	good	to	do	when	you	are	feeling	scattered.	Pay	attention	to	the	sensation
of	increased	heat	in	the	navel	area.	Use	imagination	to	circulate	the	fire	prana	throughout
the	body.

Pervasive	prana

The	pervasive	prana	pervades	the	body.

Lie	down	or	sit	in	meditation	posture.	Contract	your	body	into	the	smallest	possible	space
while	 exhaling.	Make	 your	 body	 as	 small	 as	 possible	 and	 tense	 all	 your	muscles.	 Then,
while	 inhaling,	 slowly	 open	 the	 fingers,	 the	 arms,	 the	 legs,	 the	 torso.	 Stretch	 out	 and
relax,	 taking	 up	 as	 much	 space	 as	 possible.	 As	 you	 stretch,	 feel	 the	 movement	 of	 the
pervasive	prana	from	the	center	of	the	body	out	to	all	parts,	to	the	tips	of	the	fingers	and
toes.	Exhale	and	relax	in	pure	presence,	feeling	the	prana	pervade	your	entire	body	and
the	space	around	you.



It	is	very	satisfying	to	do	this	practice	in	the	morning	upon	awakening,	but	you	can	do	it
whenever	you	wish.

Downward-moving	prana

In	this	practice	the	focus	is	in	the	secret	chakra,	behind	the	genitals.	Contract	the	muscles
of	the	pelvic	 floor,	 the	muscles	of	the	perineum	and	anus,	hold	for	a	few	moments,	 then
release.	Repeat.	You	can	also,	if	you	wish,	hold	the	breath	while	contracting	and	releasing
a	 few	times.	Exhale	on	 the	 final	 release,	directing	 the	prana	downward	out	of	 the	body,
and	merge	with	 the	relaxation	 that	comes	with	 the	release.	The	relaxation	makes	 this	a
good	practice	to	do	when	anxious	or	ungrounded.

THE	FIVE	SECRET	TSA	LUNG	PRACTICES

General

The	 secret	 level	 of	 these	practices	works	with	 the	 same	 five	 pranas	 as	 do	 the	previous
practices,	 but	 these	 practices	 are	 done	 entirely	 with	 the	 mind,	 thus	 they	 are	 “secret.”
They	 are	 a	 simplification	 of	 the	 tsa	 lung	 practices	 that	 can	 be	 done	 anywhere	 because
they	use	only	attention,	not	movement,	to	activate	the	chakras.

A	shape	and	a	color	are	associated	with	each	chakra.	The	shape	is	not	related	directly	to
the	shape	of	the	chakra,	but	rather	to	the	pattern	made	by	the	channels	of	energy	in	that
location.	The	color	 is	 related	 to	 the	qualities	of	 the	elemental	energy	being	activated	 in
the	chakra.	The	syllable	A

is	visualized	in	each	chakra	to	support	and	protect	the	experience.

Practice	with	each	chakra	three	times	or	until	it	feels	clear.	Then	evoke	i	n	it	the	quality
you	 wish	 to	 cultivate:	 compassion,	 peacefulness,	 love,	 openness,	 wisdom,	 generosity.
Develop	 the	 qualities	 you	 need	 in	 your	 practices	 and	 in	 your	 daily	 life.	 This	 practice	 is
analogous	to	clearing	a	room	for	a	shrine	and	then	making	the	altar,	hanging	the	sacred
images,	and	lighting	the	incense.

Focus	on	the	crown	chakra.	Visualize	an	umbrella	shape	rising	from	the	throat	chakra	and
spreading	out	through	the	brain	to	the	top	of	the	head.	The	color	is	pale	yellow	or	gold.
The	 upward-moving	 prana,	 associated	with	 the	 earth	 element,	 rises	 through	 the	 throat
chakra,	through	the	brain,	and	up	to	the	crown	chakra.

Pray	 that	 the	 five	 wisdoms,	 the	 positive	 divine	 qualities,	 awaken	 here	 and	 that	 they
become	strong	and	vivid.	Feel	the	opening	of	your	crown	chakra,	your	connection	to	the
highest	 spiritual	 dimensions.	 Visualize	 a	 luminous	 white	 A	 in	 the	 crown	 chakra.	 Let	 it
intensify.	It	represents	compassion.	Allow	compassion	and	luminosity	and	bliss	to	pervade
all	experience—your	entire	body,	every	being,	and	every	place.	The	compassion	 is	 lively
and	 rich,	 not	 a	 sentimental,	 artificial	 emotion.	 It	 is	 the	 deep	 compassion	 that	 arises
spontaneously	in	the	enlightened	nature.

Focus	 on	 the	 throat	 chakra.	 Allow	 it	 to	 open	 and	 relax.	 A	 luminous	 white	 A	 is	 in	 the
chakra,	 representing	 peacefulness.	 It	 radiates	 peacefulness	 in	 every	 direction	 and
pervades	each	cell	in	the	body.	It	also	pervades	the	environment	and	all	beings.

Draw	 your	 attention	 to	 the	 heart	 chakra,	 the	 center	 of	 the	 life-force	 prana	 which	 is
associated	with	the	space	element.	The	heart	center	is	spacious,	full	of	white	light	in	the
shape	of	the	wish-fulfilling	jewel.	Let	 it	open	and	relax.	There	is	presence	in	the	heart—



become	that.	Visualize	a	 luminous,	white	A	 in	 the	heart.	Evoke	the	qualities	of	 love	and
openness	 and	 let	 them	 pervade	 everywhere	 like	 pure	 white	 light	 radiating	 through	 all
time	and	space.

Put	your	attention	in	the	navel	chakra.	This	is	in	the	center	of	the	torso,	not	the	front.	It	is
red.	The	fire-like	prana	is	concentrated	there.	The	channels	radiate	out	like	the	spokes	of
a	 wheel;	 feel	 the	 heat	 radiating	 out	 from	 the	 chakra.	 Let	 all	 tension	 go.	 Visualize	 a
luminous	white	A	 in	 the	chakra.	Evoke	and	support	 the	qualities	of	clarity,	wisdom,	and
the	 natural	 state	 of	mind.	 Let	 that	 penetrate	 throughout	 existence.	 Everything	 is	 clear
presence;	every	being	is	a	manifestation	of	pure	wisdom.

Focus	on	the	chakra	between	the	navel	and	the	secret	chakra,	approximately	four	finger-
widths	below	the	navel,	where	the	side	channels	 join	the	central	channel.	The	pervasive
prana	associated	with	the	air	element	is	concentrated	here.	Feel	the	air	quality.	Visualize
a	 white,	 luminous	 A.	 Allow	 the	 positive	 aspects	 of	 air	 to	 arise:	 flexibility,	 clarity,
intelligence.	Let	the	positive	qualities	radiate	from	the	chakra	throughout	space	like	green
rays	of	light.

Let	 the	mind	 focus	on	 the	secret	chakra,	where	 the	downward-moving	prana	associated
with	 the	 water	 element	 is	 concentrated.	 The	 energy	 is	 concentrated	 in	 the	 shape	 of	 a
bellows	with	 its	point	 facing	down.	Feel	 the	strong	presence	of	 the	element.	Visualize	a
white	A.	 Evoke	 and	 sustain	 the	quality	 of	 generosity.	 Let	 the	 knots	 of	 greed	 and	desire
unbind.	Relax	the	tensions	of	self-centeredness	and	dissolve	the	fear	of	loss.	Radiate	the
energy	of	openness,	sharing,	and	giving.

Use	your	 imagination	 to	develop	your	experience,	 to	bring	 the	changes	 into	awareness,
and	to	support	and	sustain	 the	positive	qualities.	Work	with	all	of	 them	together	or	 just
one	positive	quality	and	one	chakra.	Pay	attention	to	the	differences	in	experience	when
you	 focus	 on	 different	 chakras.	 Experiment.	 Do	 the	 practices	 during	 your	 meditation
period,	or	during	the	day	when	you	need	to	come	back	to	yourself,	or	at	anytime.

When	you	need	energy,	do	the	more	physical	practices.	They	will	en-liven	your	experience.
Do	 the	 more	 subtle	 exercises	 afterward,	 when	 you	 can’t	 do	 the	 physical	 ones	 for	 any
reason,	or	when	you	are	sitting	quietly	or	walking.

Whenever	the	experience	of	the	positive	quality	is	generated,	radiate	it	out	in	the	form	of
light	to	positively	affect	every	being	and	every	element	of	the	environment.	Tantra	works
with	 this	 kind	 of	 transformation	 until	 it	 becomes	 a	 habitual	way	 to	 perceive	 the	world.
Goodness	 really	 is	 in	 the	world;	 it	 is	 only	 the	 distortions	 of	 our	 karmic	 tendencies	 that
keep	us	from	knowing	so	directly.

If	you	have	a	headache,	feel	the	peacefulness	in	the	headache.	If	there	is	turmoil—people
angry,	the	weather	stormy—be	aware	of	the	peacefulness	in	the	ground	of	the	anger,	the
peacefulness	of	the	space	through	which	the	storm	passes.	As	you	work	with	each	quality,
find	 it	 in	 even	 the	 most	 unlikely	 experiences.	 It’s	 like	 hearing	 the	 silence	 under	 the
loudest	sounds.

OPENING	THE	CHAKRAS

Each	of	the	exercises	above	opens	a	different	chakra—but	why	is	it	important	to	open	the
chakras?	One	metaphor	has	 the	central	channel	as	 the	 trunk	of	a	 tree.	The	chakras	are
the	branches;	 the	pranic	energies	are	 flowers;	 the	qualities	associated	with	 the	chakras
are	 the	 fruits.	 The	 fruit	 is	 ripened	when	 the	 qualities	manifest	 in	 awareness.	When	 the
chakras	 are	 closed,	 the	 qualities	 cannot	 be	 fully	 expressed.	 For	 example,	 when	 the
chakras	 are	 closed,	 there	 is	 still	 compassion	 but	 it	 is	 a	 small	 experience.	 When	 the
chakras	are	completely	open,	the	compassion	is	larger	and	more	inclusive	and	begins	to
approach	the	global,	fundamental	compassion	that	naturally	arises	in	the	buddhas.

The	practices	of	channels	and	winds	unblock	the	channels	and	chakras.	The	process	is	like
unblocking	 ice	 that	 is	 stuck	 in	 a	 pipe:	 you	 can	 shake	 it	 or	 heat	 it	 up,	 and	 then	 blow
through	it	to	clear	it.	The	physical	movement	is	like	shaking	the	pipe;	holding	the	breath
and	directing	the	prana	with	the	mind	heats	 it	up.	Exhaling		 is	 like	blowing	through	the
channels	and	chakras	to	clear	them.	The	result	is	the	feeling	of	openness	and	release.

As	I	have	said	before,	going	beyond	the	physical	practices	by	using	the	 imagination	and
attention	will	 help	 us	 open	 to	 the	 energetic	 level	 of	 experience	 and	 shift	 the	 quality	 of
consciousness.	Then	we	find	that	in	the	heart	is	a	buddha	of	compassion;	in	the	crown,	a
buddha	of	bliss;	in	the	throat,	a	buddha	of	peace;	in	the	navel,	a	buddha	of	wisdom;	and	in



the	secret	chakra,	a	buddha	of	generosity.

Sometimes	people	have	specific	experiences	when	a	chakra	opens.	Because	many	people
in	the	West	have	been	conditioned	to	experience	energetic	blocks	in	the	body	as	emotional
rather	 than	 physical	 or	 energetic,	 they	 often	 experience	 the	 release	 of	 the	 block	 as	 an
emotional	catharsis.	Traditionally,	in	Tibetan	culture,	the	release	of	blocks	manifests	more
as	energetic	and	physical	phenomena:	the	practitioner	may	quiver,	shake,	twitch,	sweat,
become	dizzy,	and	so	on.	Other	people	may	 find	 that	 images	rise	 in	 their	minds	as	 they
concentrate	 on	 a	 chakra.	 These	 images	 may	 be	 tied	 to	 blocks	 or	 tensions	 that	 have
constricted	 the	 flow	 of	 prana	 through	 the	 chakra—negative	 memories	 or	 traumas.	 Or
positive	images	may	come	when	the	chakra	is	open—spiritual	symbols,	deities,	buddhas,
goddesses,	and	so	on.

However	it’s	not	necessary	to	have	some	kind	of	experience	when	the	chakra	opens—it’s
more	 likely	 that	nothing	 in	particular	will	happen.	The	deeper	opening	 is	not	emotional
nor	is	it	about	images.	But	if	something	does	happen,	just	give	it	space	to	occur	and	don’t
hold	on	to	it.	Allow	it,	then	allow	it	to	go.	It’s	only	an	experience	of	purification,	nothing	to
hold	on	to.

If	you	have	no	sensation	in	one	of	the	chakras,	it’s	likely	that	the	chakra	is	blocked.	Try	to
consciously	 relax	 the	 area.	 Massage	 it.	 Breathe	 into	 it.	 The	 mind	 can	 reach	 it	 with
attention	and	awareness.	When	it	does,	it	moves	prana	into	the	area.	This	will	help.

Whether	 or	 not	 you	 first	 have	 experiences	 of	 emotional	 release	 or	 images	 or	 physical
manifestations,	eventually	the	experience	will	be	of	space,	openness,	and	positive	qualities
that	are	traditionally	thought	of	as	different	aspects	of	wisdom.

Because	 people	 often	 depend	 on	 weaknesses	 and	 problems	 to	 support	 their	 identities,
when	those	are	taken	away	the	experience	of	spaciousness	can	be	frightening.	Then	old
habits	will	 reassert	 themselves	and	 the	space	will	be	 filled	with	whatever	daydreams	or
emotional	experiences	or	actions	normally	fill	the	space	of	life.

Instead,	 you	 can	 use	 armor	 to	 protect	 the	 space:	 visualized	 sacred	 syllables,	 mantras,
deities,	or	images	of	your	teacher.	Generate	positive	symbols	in	the	space	of	the	chakras
to	protect	them	from	the	return	of	habitual	karmic	tendencies	and	habits.

Tantra	never	considers	the	body	to	be	sinful	or	impure.	Instead	it	is	a	mandala	or	palace	of
the	sacred.	In	some	tantric	texts	there	are	enumerations	of	the	number	of	deities	 in	the
hands,	the	head,	the	organs,	and	so	on,	so	that	the	entire	body	is	understood	as	a	network
of	 divine	 energies	 and	 potentialities.	 The	 sacred	 nature	 of	 the	 body	 needs	 to	 be
recognized	and	lived.



FOUR

THE	FIVE	ELEMENTS	IN	THE
GREAT	PERFECTION

This	book	would	not	be	complete	without	a	section	on	Dzogchen.	Dzogchen	teachings	are
integrated	 with	 an	 understanding	 of	 the	 elements.	 However,	 unlike	 the	 sections	 of	 the
book	on	shamanism	and	tantra,	there	are	no	specific	practices	given.	Although	there	are
supportive	practices	described	in	Dzogchen	texts,	the	essential	practice	of	Dzogchen	does
not	 begin	 until	 the	 practitioner	 recognizes	 the	 nature	 of	 mind.	 It	 is	 easy	 to	 make	 a
mistake,	thinking	one	experience	or	another	is	the	nature	of	mind	when	it	is	not.	The	best
way	to	become	certain	regarding	this	most	vital	point	is	to	work	with	a	teacher	who	knows
the	nature	of	mind	and	knows	how	to	point	it	out	to	others.

Because	this	chapter	is	meant	primarily	for	practitioners	who	have	already	had	Dzogchen
teachings,	a	few	of	the	terms	may	be	unfamiliar	to	some	readers.

	

THE	GREAT	PERFECTION

In	 the	 Bön	 tradition,	 the	 highest	 teaching	 is	 Dzogchen,	 the	 Great	 Perfection	 or	 Great
Completion.	 Dzogchen	 teaches	 that	 the	 basis	 of	 the	 individual	 and	 of	 all	 phenomena	 is
inseparable	emptiness	(tong	pa	nyid)	and	luminosity	(‘od	sal).

Emptiness	 is	 the	 essence	of	 all	 entities.	 This	means	 that	 the	most	 fundamental	 truth	 of
things	and	beings	 is	 that	 they	have	no	essential	 identity.	Entities	conventionally	exist	as
conceptual	designations	but	their	 identity	 is	not	 intrinsic;	 it	 is	situational	and	transitory.
As	 conditions	 supporting	 an	 identity	 pass	 away	 and	 new	 conditions	 arise,	 the	 identity
changes.	A	 tree	 is	set	alight	and	becomes	 fire,	 then	ash;	eventually	no	 trace	of	 the	 tree
can	 be	 found.	Where	 did	 the	 tree	 go?	 Even	 our	 subjective	 sense	 of	 self	 is	 conditional,
conceptually	designated,	changeable,	and	impermanent.

	

This	 emptiness	 is	 not	 simply	 a	 nihilistic	 lack	 of	 existence	 or	 an	 absence	 of	 meaning.
Obviously	 experience	 continues	 to	 arise	 for	 each	 of	 us.	 Awareness,	 together	 with	 the
endless	 arising	 of	 phenomena	 in	 experience,	 is	 the	 other	 aspect	 of	 fundamental	 reality:
luminosity	or	clarity.	Luminosity	is	both	the	concept	and	the	sensual	experience	that	best
represents	awareness,	which	is	often	symbolized	by	light.	And	luminosity	also	represents
our	experience	of	phenomena	as	they	“light	up”	in	our	experience.

Emptiness	and	luminosity	are	inseparable.	Emptiness	is	luminous	and	luminosity	is	empty.
In	Dzogchen	this	fundamental	reality	is	said	to	have	a	capacity	or	energy	(tsal)	expressed
as	 the	unceasing	manifestation	 of	 phenomena—the	endless	 arising	 and	passing	away	of
countless	luminous	worlds	and	beings—all	essentially	empty	but	existing	as	a	passing	play
of	 light.	 Phenomena	 arise	 as	 a	 display	 of	 the	 basis	 of	 all	 (kunzhi),	 as	 the	 non-dual
manifestation	of	empty	luminosity.

In	 the	 context	 of	 this	 book,	 emptiness	 and	 luminosity	 can	be	 represented	by	 space	 and
light.	 Dzogchen	 is	 the	 great	 knowledge	 of	 space	 and	 light.	 Space	 is	 the	 empty	 Great



Mother	 from	which	all	 things	arise	as	a	 luminous	display,	 in	which	all	 things	have	 their
existence,	and	into	which	all	things	dissolve.	The	luminous	display	is	the	play	of	the	five
pure	lights,	the	essence	of	the	five	elements.	The	manifestation	is	all	things	and	all	beings
and	all	elements	of	experience.	This	is	the	basis	of	the	Dzogchen	view.

CREATING	SAMSARA

The	 true	 nature	 of	 all	 sentient	 beings	 is	 buddha-nature	 and	 all	 phenomena	 are
fundamentally	 pure.	 Subjective	 identifications	 and	 external	 appearances	 are	 empty
phenomena,	 spontaneously	 arising	 as	 the	 play	 of	 the	 elemental	 energies.	 Even	 filth,
disease,	and	apparently	evil	beings	are	naturally	pure.

Yet	we	suffer.

Unless	 we	 actually	 abide	 in	 the	 nature	 of	 mind,	 talk	 about	 non-dual	 presence	 and
primordial	purity	remains	only	talk	about	concepts,	ungrounded	in	experience.	It	 is	easy
to	allow	Dzogchen	to	remain	theory,	and	not	put	it	into	practice.	My	teacher,	Lopon	Tenzin
Namdak	Rinpoche,	 often	points	 out	 that	 it	 is	 a	mistake	 to	 confuse	 the	non-dual	 view	of
Dzogchen	with	 the	 practitioner	 of	 Dzogchen	who	 struggles	 in	 the	 dualities	 of	 samsara.
While	 the	Dzogchen	view	 is	non-dual,	 in	ordinary	 life	 there	 is	pure	and	 impure,	positive
and	 negative,	 helpful	 and	 harmful,	 and	 we	 have	 to	 know	 the	 difference	 and	 act
accordingly.

	

Earlier	in	the	book	I	wrote	about	the	five	pure	lights,	about	the	process	through	which	the
purity	of	the	elemental	energies	comes	to	be	perceived	as	the	substantial,	dualistic	world
we	experience	around	us.	Because	we	do	not	recognize	the	nature	of	our	own	minds,	we
come	 to	 identify	 with	 a	 “me”	 in	 opposition	 to	 all	 that	 is	 “not-me.”	 Our	 identities	 are
constricted	and	we	experience	phenomena	as	separate	from	us.	This	process	is	rooted	in
the	 wrong	 view	 that	 things	 and	 beings	 exist	 independently.	 Our	 internal	 confusion
becomes	external	manifestation.

Conversely,	 as	we	experience	 the	 external	world	 and	ourselves	 as	 empty	 luminosity,	we
start	to	thin	the	primordial	ignorance	that	traps	us	in	the	cycles	of	suffering.	There	is	no
conflict	 with	 anything	 in	 experience.	 The	 elements	 naturally	 settle	 into	 a	 balanced
relationship.	Through	recognizing	and	abiding	in	the	nature	of	mind,	we	dissolve	dualistic
experience	into	the	empty	radiance	that	is	its	basis.

Correcting	the	view	isn’t	about	changing	beliefs,	though	that	is	a	start.	It	means	changing
the	 processes	 of	 experience	 and	 dissolving	 the	 dualism	 of	 subject	 and	 object.	We	must
recognize	our	own	nature—buddha-nature—directly.

THE	SIX	LAMPS

The	Zhang	Zhung	Nyan	Gyud	is	an	ancient	cycle	of	Bön	Dzogchen	teachings.	It	contains
quintessential	esoteric	teachings	as	well	as	practices	relating	to	Dzogchen.	The	Six	Lamps
is	a	text	found	in	the	Zhang	Zhung	Nyan	Gyud.	It	is	a	fairly	long	text	composed	of	a	root
text	and	a	commentary.	Like	the	text	on	the	five	pure	lights,	it	is	a	teaching	that	explains
both	the	primordially	pure	essence	and	the	error	of	the	dualistic	mind.	Here	I	give	a	very
short	explanation	of	the	text.

From	The	Six	Lamps:

How	are	samsara	and	nirvana	separated?

How	is	Samantabhadra	the	primordial	buddha?

How	do	sentient	beings	wander	in	samsara	with	their	karma?

Samantabhadra	is	the	buddha	through	realizing.

Sentient	beings	wander	in	sa	msara	through	not	realizing.

The	 empty	 basis	 (kunzhi)	 and	 innate	 awareness	 (rigpa)	 are	 the	 basis	 of	 delusion	 and
realization.

The	moving	mind	is	the	cause	of	delusion	and	realization.



The	 three	 visions	 of	 sound,	 light,	 and	 rays	 are	 the	 secondary	 causes	 of	 delusion	 and
realization.

There	is	no	delusion	or	realization	in	kunzhi	and	rigpa.

There	is	no	separation	of	samsara	and	nirvana	in	kunzhi	and	rigpa.

There	is	delusion	and	realization	in	the	moving	mind.

There	arises	the	separation	of	samsara	and	nirvana	in	the	moving	mind.

Samsara	 and	 nirvana,	 ignorance	 and	 realization,	 deluded	 beings	 and	 buddhas,	 all	 arise
from	the	same	basis,	the	kunzhi,	which	is	beyond	any	dualism	of	pure	or	impure,	existent
or	nonexistent.	The	moving	mind	arises	from	the	kunzhi	as	a	result	of	karma.

Samantabhadra	is	the	primordial	buddha	because	he	was	never	deluded,	never	distracted
from	 the	 natural	 state.	 He	 never	 mistook	 phenomena	 for	 something	 other	 than	 empty
luminosity.	 We	 ordinary	 beings	 are	 distracted.	 We	 identify	 with	 the	 moving	 mind	 and
objectify	phenomena.	Deluded	and	 trapped	 in	 the	dualistic	vision	of	me	and	not-me,	we
wander	in	samsara.

As	I	stated	earlier,	Dzogchen	teachings	say	that	 inseparable	emptiness	and	luminosity	 is
the	 true	 nature	 of	 all	 phenomena.	 In	 Dzogchen	 teachings,	 this	 fundamental	 reality	 is
sometimes	symbolized	as	a	single	sphere	of	pure	light.	It	is	single	because	it	is	non-dual.
It	is	not	single	in	opposition	to	something	else.	It	has	no	boundaries	or	divisions,	no	inside
or	outside.	Though	it	is	non-dual,	the	elemental	energies	ceaselessly	manifest	in	it.	This	is
why	it	is	often	painted	as	a	sphere	of	rainbow	light	made	of	the	five	elemental	colors.

Light	 is	 used	 as	 a	 symbol	 because	 it	 is	 the	 least	 substantial	 of	 all	 things	 that	 we	 can
perceive	through	the	senses.	Also,	the	nature	of	mind	is	radiant	and	clear,	like	light.	Like
the	light	of	a	candle,	awareness	illuminates	itself	as	well	as	whatever	it	touches.

In	 Tibetan	 teachings,	 the	 word	 nang	 wa	 is	 often	 translated	 into	 English	 as	 “vision”	 or
“appearance.”	 But	 it	 does	 not	 refer	 only	 to	 visual	 phenomena.	 In	 this	 case,	 “vision”
actually	means	“experience”	and	includes	what	is	seen	through	the	physical	eyes	and	the
mind’s	eye;	what	is	heard,	smelled,	tasted,	touched;	what	arises	in	mental	experience;	and
what	is	imagined.	These	are	all	“visions”	because	they	arise	in	the	light	of	awareness,	the
light	 of	 pure	presence.	Although	 these	are	 only	words,	 they	 are	 close	 to	describing	 the
real	experience.	Luminosity	means	the	“light”	of	awareness	as	well	as	all	phenomena	that
arise	in	awareness,	which	without	exception	are	also	luminous.

The	Six	Lamps	refers	to	the	basis	of	all	as	well	as	five	levels	of	manifest	experience.	The
six	divisions	are	called	lamps	because	each	refers	to	the	same	light	in	one	of	six	different
contexts.

The	first	lamp	(gnas-pa	gzhi-yi	sgron-ma)

The	first	lamp	is	the	luminosity	of	the	abiding	base,	the	primordial	non-dual	presence.	It	is
not	personal,	not	individualized,	not	localized,	not	dualistic.	It	is	the	luminous	aspect	that,
in	 inseparable	 unity	 with	 emptiness,	 is	 the	 basis	 of	 all	 experience.	 If	 the	 practitioner
recognizes	the	first	lamp—not	intellectually	but	by	abiding	in	innate	non-dual	awareness—
then	 the	 basis	 of	 all	 is	 known	 in	 every	 experience	 and	 condition	 and	 in	 the	 other	 five
lamps.

The	point	of	the	first	lamp	is	to	recognize	the	light	of	kunzhi.

The	second	lamp	(tsi-ta	sha-yi	sgron-ma)

The	 second	 lamp	 is	 the	 “lamp	 of	 the	 flesh	 heart,”	 the	 lamp	 of	 the	 self-arising	 innate
awareness,	rigpa,	in	the	dimension	of	the	individual.	It	is	personal	only	in	the	sense	that	it
is	 the	 pure	 awareness	 underlying	 the	 moving	 mind	 and	 the	 sense	 of	 subjectivity.	 It	 is
related	to	the	dharmakaya.	It	is	awareness	localized	as	an	individual	experiencing.	But	it
is	not	bound	by	any	constricted	 identity,	although	 through	 the	delusions	of	 the	dualistic
mind	we	have	come	to	experience	it	as	being	bound.

Although	 rigpa	 is	not	actually	 localized,	many	practitioners	can	most	easily	 recognize	 it
through	 a	 connection	 to	 the	 heart	 center.	 The	 Six	 Lamps	 specifically	 discusses	 this	 in
terms	of	the	space	inside	of	the	physical	heart.	Westerners	often	find	this	strange,	but	it’s
similar	 to	what	we	mean	when	we	 say	 that	 “in”	 each	 being	 is	 the	 nature	 of	mind.	 The



nature	of	mind	 is	not	 individual	and	not	 localized.	 It	 is	 truer	 to	say	 that	we	exist	 in	 the
nature	of	mind	than	to	say	the	nature	of	mind	is	in	us.	But	in	our	experience	it	is	easier	to
recognize	 the	nature	of	mind	 if	we	go	“in”	 to	 the	deepest	place	 in	ourselves,	 the	heart.
This	is	why	we	say	that	the	rigpa	resides	in	the	heart,	and	why	the	heart	is	the	center	of
the	life-force	prana	and	why	love	is	always	connected	to	the	heart.	Thus	we	talk	about	the
“light	of	the	heart”.

The	point	of	the	second	lamp	is	to	recognize	the	light	of	innate	awareness	within.

The	third	lamp	(dkar-’jam	tsa-yi	sgron-ma)

The	third	lamp	is	the	“lamp	of	the	soft	white	channel.”	It	is	rigpa	and	the	prana	of	rigpa	as
it	moves	 in	the	channels	of	the	body,	particularly	the	channel	that	connects	the	heart	to
the	eyes.	It	is	associated	with	the	sambhogakaya.

The	 third	 lamp	 is	 the	 rigpa	 as	 it	 pervades,	 as	 it	 seems	 to	move	 from	 the	 heart	 center
throughout	experience.	Rigpa	is	not	a	substance	and	does	not	move.	Rigpa	abides	in	the
heart,	unmoving	like	the	dharmakaya,	but	here	it	seems	to	be	moving.	The	movement	in
the	third	lamp	is	actually	the	liveliness	of	rigpa.	It	is	the	life-force	prana.	It	is	the	wisdom
of	rigpa,	which	pervades	everywhere.	Although	rigpa	does	not	move,	there	is	movement	in
rigpa	and	rigpa	can	be	experienced	in	movement.	The	practitioner	who	is	distracted	from
the	nature	of	mind	can	seem	to	be	far	from	rigpa	but	no	one	can	ever	be	truly	separated
from	his	or	her	own	nature.	We	find	ourselves	unable	to	recognize	rigpa	even	though	it	is
the	awareness	underneath	the	search,	the	searcher,	and	the	not	finding.

Because	we	seem	to	lose	connection	to	pure	presence,	we	need	to	go	back	into	ourselves,
into	the	heart,	into	the	center	of	experience.	If	the	practitioner	recognizes	the	essence	in
the	first	lamp	or	abides	in	rigpa	in	the	second	lamp,	in	the	apparent	movement	of	the	third
lamp	 he	 or	 she	 will	 continue	 to	 abide	 in	 pure	 presence	 and	 the	 movement	 will	 be
integrated	with	the	nature	of	mind.

The	point	of	the	third	lamp	is	to	recognize	the	light	of	the	penetrating	wisdom	as	it	moves
through	the	channels.

The	fourth	lamp	(rgyang-zhag	chu-yi	sgron-ma)

The	 fourth	 lamp	 is	 the	“water	 lamp	 that	 lights	 the	distance.”	 It	 is	 the	 innate	awareness
experienced	 through	 the	 senses,	 particularly	 the	 eye	 (the	 water	 lamp).	 The	 teaching
relates	the	fourth	lamp	to	the	nirmanakaya.	For	the	practitioner,	this	lamp	is	found	in	the
first	 moment	 of	 sensory	 experience,	 before	 the	 conceptual	 mind	 shapes	 the	 raw	 sense
data	into	apparent	entities	and	things.	For	most	beings	identified	with	the	moving	mind,
this	 first	 moment	 of	 experience	 is	 like	 a	 very	 brief	 moment	 of	 blankness.	 But	 for	 the
practitioner	 who	 has	 been	 introduced	 to	 the	 nature	 of	 mind,	 the	 first	 moment	 of	 any
experience	allows	direct	recognition	of	the	innate	non-dual	awareness	of	rigpa.

The	point	of	the	fourth	lamp	is	to	see	the	light	of	naked	awareness	before	experience	is
divided	into	particular	forms	or	entities.

The	fifth	lamp	(zhing	khams	ngo-sprod	sgron-ma)

The	fifth	lamp	is	the	“lamp	of	introduction	to	the	pure	land.”	It	is	the	light	of	rigpa	as	it
manifests	 as	 luminous,	 apparently	 external	 objects	 and	 visions.	 When	 the	 practitioner
abides	in	the	primordial	awareness	of	the	first	lamp,	the	objects	that	arise	to	the	senses
remain	pure	and	non-dual.	This	is	known	as	“cutting	doubt	in	the	three	bodies	(kayas).”

One	 of	 the	 symbols	 used	 in	 teaching	 Dzogchen	 is	 the	 hollow	 doll,	 an	 empty	 shell	 with
holes	in	it	where	the	senses	would	be	in	a	person:	eyes,	ears,	mouth,	and	nose.	In	a	dark
room,	a	 lit	candle	 is	placed	 inside	 the	doll.	There	 is	 light	 in	 the	center	of	 the	doll,	 light
moving	throughout	the	doll,	and	light	illuminating	what	is	external	to	the	doll—it	is	all	the
same	 light.	 Like	 the	 explanation	 in	 The	 Six	 Lamps,	 this	 points	 to	 the	 luminosity	 of
primordial	awareness	as	it	is	recognized	in	different	contexts.

The	light	from	inside	the	doll	illuminates	what	is	external	to	it.	This	is	the	opposite	of	the
way	we	think	in	the	West,	where	it	 is	believed	that	the	world	comes	into	us	through	the
senses.	In	the	Tibetan	tradition,	it	is	believed	that	the	awareness	experiences	through	the
senses.	 It	 is	 important	 to	 remember	 that	 what	 appears	 to	 be	 outside	 is	 actually
phenomena	 arising	 in	 awareness.	 Experience	 is	 non-dual;	 subject	 and	 object	 arise
together.	 They	 are	 divided	 into	 internal	 self	 and	 external	 object	 only	 conceptually—the



light	 is	not	actually	divided	within	or	without.	 In	reality	both	poles	of	duality	are	empty,
luminous	phenomena	arising	in	the	nature	of	mind.

This	is	the	point	of	the	fifth	lamp—that	the	light	of	naked	non-dual	awareness	lies	under
the	apparent	division	into	subject	and	object.

The	sixth	lamp	(bar-do	dus-kyi	sgron-ma)

The	 sixth	 lamp	 is	 the	 lamp	 of	 the	 bardo,	 the	 intermediate	 state	 after	 death	 and	 before
rebirth.	 The	 visions	 and	 experiences	 that	 arise	 in	 the	 bardo	 are	 karmically	 determined
manifestations	of	our	own	minds,	as	are	the	experiences	in	this	life.	For	the	practitioner
who	 recognizes	 their	 true	 nature,	 there	 is	 liberation.	 For	 the	 person	 who	 does	 not
recognize	the	visions	as	self-arising,	one	vision	eventually	dominates	and	the	individual	is
led	to	the	realm	and	specific	situation	of	his	or	her	next	rebirth	in	cyclic	existence.

The	point	of	the	sixth	lamp	is	the	recognition	of	the	light	of	samsara	and	nirvana.

The	 central	 teaching	 of	 The	 Six	 Lamps	 is	 that	 everything—every	 experience,	 every
thought,	every	identity—is	the	manifestation	of	the	pure,	luminous	basis	of	existence.	One
must	recognize	this	and	abide	in	the	recognition.	Though	The	Six	Lamps	does	not	speak	of
five	lights,	the	luminosity	that	it	is	describing	is	the	five	pure	lights	of	the	elements.	This
is	what	is	to	be	understood,	recognized,	and	lived	in.

The	luminosity	in	the	first	lamp	is	unbound	pure	presence.	The	succeeding	lamps	are	the
fundamental	 pure	 presence	 abiding	 in	 the	 heart,	 arising	 as	 individual	 experience,
operating	in	the	senses,	manifesting	as	phenomenal	appearance,	and	finally	appearing	as
the	bardo	visions.	The	light	that	illuminates	and	is	each	of	these	varied	experiences	is	the
same	sacred	light,	the	innate	non-dual	awareness.

Dzogchen	 teachings	 say	 that	 all	 gross	 and	 subtle	 visions—whether	 the	 outer	 visions	 of
mountains	 and	 buildings	 and	 so	 on	 or	 the	 internal	 visions	 that	 arise	 in	meditation	 and
spiritual	 practice—arise	 from	 the	 five	 pure	 lights.	One	needs	 support	 to	 experience	 the
five	pure	lights	internally,	the	support	of	practice	and	the	teachings.	Through	the	grosser
external	 visions,	 one	 tries	 to	 experience	 the	 subtle.	 Through	 experience	 of	 the	 subtle
vision,	 one	 tries	 to	 recognize	 the	 pure	 luminosity—the	 five	 pure	 lights—in	 all	 external
visions.

For	the	practice	of	Dzogchen,	one	must	learn	to	abide	in	the	realization	of	the	first	lamp
through	 all	 experience.	 We	 can	 meditate	 in	 a	 shrine	 room	 and	 have	 experiences	 of
emptiness,	clarity,	and	bliss.	And	then	get	up	and	walk	to	the	store	and	become	involved
with	 someone	 and	 lose	 ourselves	 in	 the	 interaction.	But	 the	 awareness	underlying	both
the	 meditative	 experience	 and	 the	 distractions	 of	 our	 daily	 lives	 is	 what	 we	 must
recognize	and	abide	 in.	When	we	abide	 in	rigpa,	what	we	experience	as	external	 is	 less
substantial.	 Our	 identities	 are	 less	 substantial.	 Our	 problems	 are	 less	 substantial.	 We
experience	rigpa	everywhere;	there	is	no	difference	between	inside	and	outside	the	body.
There	 is	 no	 difference	 between	 meditation	 and	 non-meditation.	 We	 experience	 rigpa
through	the	senses.	This	is	not	done	with	the	senses;	what	is	experienced	with	the	senses
are	the	sense	objects.	Experiencing	rigpa	through	the	senses	has	nothing	to	do	with	sense
objects;	it	is	about	connecting	to	the	inner	light—abiding	in	rigpa—and	staying	connected
during	sensual	experiences.

Dzogchen	 isn’t	 really	 about	 the	 personal.	 It	 is	 concerned	 with	 space	 and	 light,	 with
emptiness	 and	 non-dual	 awareness,	 more	 than	 with	 the	 development	 of	 qualities.
Dzogchen	 truly	 begins	 as	 a	 path	 when	 the	 first	 lamp	 is	 recognized,	 and	 it	 isn’t	 the
property	 of	 Tibetans	 or	Westerners,	 of	 humans	 or	 non-humans.	What	 is	 realized	 is	 the
nature	of	every	being.

SOUND,	LIGHT,	AND	RAYS

The	Six	Lamps	categorizes	all	phenomena	as	sound,	light,	or	rays.

When	the	three	objects	of	vision	[sound,	light,	and	rays]	arise,

if	the	moving	mind	realizes	them	to	be	self-vision,

then	one	experiences	the	naked	innate	awareness	through	the	visions,

then	one	clearly	realizes	the	unobscured	base.



It	also	says:

When	innate	awareness	is	unified	with	light,

all	samsaric	and	nirvanic	bodies	manifest.

When	innate	awareness	is	unified	with	sound,

all	samsaric	speech	and	the	speech	of	the	buddha	arises.

When	innate	awareness	is	unified	with	the	rays,	

all	samsaric	and	nirvanic	consciousness	manifests.

If	 all	 phenomena,	 including	 the	 subjective	 sense	 of	 self,	 are	 recognized	 as	 an	 empty
display	of	space	and	light,	one	is	free.	Then	whatever	arises	is	simply	an	ornament	of	pure
being.	 If	 phenomena,	 including	 the	 sense	 of	 self,	 are	 reacted	 to	 as	 if	 they	 were
independent,	separate	entities	or	objects,	one	is	lost.

When	sound	manifests	in	awareness	it	is	fundamentally	pure	sound.	In	the	first	moment	of
experience,	sound	is	not	divided	from	the	subject.	When	sound	is	taken	to	be	an	external
object	of	a	subject,	it	is	misunderstood	as	having	an	independent	existence.	Then	meaning
is	projected	upon	 it.	For	example,	when	we	are	very	young,	we	hear	 someone	speaking
but	do	not	experience	it	as	something	separate	from	us.	Later,	we	learn	the	language	and
then	project	meaning	into	the	sounds,	but	we	believe	that	the	meaning	is	external	to	us.
Yet,	 when	 we	 encounter	 a	 foreign	 language,	 there	 is	 no	 meaning	 in	 it	 until	 we	 learn
enough	to	project	meaning	into	it.	This	is	true	for	all	sound;	at	first	it	is	only	sound,	then
we	learn	to	project	meaning	on	it.	Sounds	become	words	or	a	cat	in	the	underbrush	or	a
car	in	the	distance.	We	hear	an	unknown	sound	and	ask	what	it	is.	We	get	an	answer,	and
the	next	time	the	sound	arises	we	hear	it	less	and	think	it	more.

All	concepts	we	are	capable	of	thinking	can	manifest	in	speech.	From	this,	samsaric	and
nirvanic	speech	arise.	Samsaric	speech	is	impure	speech.	It	is	not	only	speech	that	hurts,
such	as	angry	speech,	or	that	misleads,	such	as	deceitful	speech,	but	also	ordinary	speech
that	supports	a	dualistic	view.	Nirvanic	speech	is	the	speech	of	the	buddhas.	It	is	said	that
the	speech	of	a	buddha	is	so	powerful	and	pure	that	it	will	be	understood	even	by	people
who	ordinarily	understand	different	languages.

When	 we	 abide	 in	 non-dual	 awareness,	 we	 understand	 language	 while	 maintaining	 a
strong	connection	to	the	pure	basis	of	sound.	For	example,	someone	says,	“I	don’t	want	to
see	you	ever	again.”	Usually	 these	words	evoke	pain	or	anger	although	 in	 their	essence
they	are	simply	pure	sound.	When	we’re	identified	with	a	narrow	self,	we	project	meaning,
feel	rejected,	and	suffer.	When	we	abide	in	rigpa,	we	are	not	identified	with	a	personal	self
and	 thus	 there	 is	 no	 suffering.	 The	 words	 are	 understood	 but	 they	 simply	 dissolve	 in
awareness;	 they	do	not	 leave	grief	or	anger	 in	 their	passage.	Their	basic	nature	 is	pure
and	they	dissolve	back	into	that	purity.	Again,	this	doesn’t	mean	that	we	are	unable	to	talk
when	 abiding	 in	 rigpa—we	 are	 able	 to	 respond	 to	 experience	 appropriately	 and	 fully,
without	being	completely	driven	by	karmic	habit.

Light	is	simply	the	elemental	energy	that	I	have	been	writing	about.	When	we	combine	it
with	awareness	 it	 reveals	 form.	We	 learn	 to	understand	 forms	 in	 the	same	way	 that	we
learn	to	understand	language.	We	project	meaning	onto	the	sensual	experience	of	sight.
We	 can	 see	 the	 form	 of	 the	 buddha	 and	 also	 see	 forms	 toward	 which	 we	 feel	 violent
aversion	or	desperate	longing.	But	fundamentally,	our	experience	of	form	is	an	experience
of	light.

In	the	context	of	the	above	verse,	the	rays	are	beings	and	objects.	In	the	same	way	that
the	 light	 that	 fills	 the	 whole	 sky	 and	 the	 rays	 of	 the	 sun	 are	 the	 same	 light	 seen	 in
different	 conditions,	 the	 awareness	 of	 sentient	 beings	 is	 pure	 primordial	 awareness
manifesting	as	apparently	individual	entities.

If	we	are	deluded	about	our	own	nature,	we	are	deluded	about	everything.	We	are	lost	in
samsara,	wandering,	guided	by	karmic	dispositions.	What	we	encounter	is	a	projection	of
our	own	minds,	but	we	believe	it	to	be	something	independent	that	arises	on	its	own.	This
dualism	leads	to	attraction	or	aversion	and	the	result	is	that	the	elements	in	our	personal
dimension	become	unbalanced.

BEING	WITH	PROBLEMS



Everyone	in	samsara	has	problems.	That	is	the	nature	of	samsara.	Practice	will	not	make
anyone	problem-free	as	long	as	one	is	in	samsara,	despite	what	many	Westerners	seem	to
believe.	People	often	ask	me	if	people	who	always	abide	in	the	natural	state	get	ill.	Even
people	who	abide	continuously	in	this	state—if	they	have	a	body!—will	become	ill	if	they
live	 long	enough.	The	rent	still	has	 to	be	paid,	 the	car	needs	gas,	 food	must	be	bought,
relationships	have	difficulties,	and	finally	the	body	dies.

Though	practice	will	not	remove	all	the	difficulties	of	a	life,	it	will	lead	the	practitioner	to
better	 ways	 to	 deal	 with	 problems.	 This	 is	 a	 much	 bigger	 statement	 than	 it	 sounds,
because	in	the	practices	the	emphasis	is	on	how	to	be	rather	than	on	the	problem.	Most
people	 don’t	 know	 how	 to	 be	 with	 a	 problem	 and	 often	 don’t	 have	 a	 good	 method	 of
working	 with	 difficulties.	 Instead,	 they	 have	 the	 pervasive	 idea	 that	 problems	 have
substantial	 causesand	 that	 the	 resolution	 of	 problems	 lies	 there.	 In	 psychotherapy	 it’s
common	 to	 think	 that	 problems	 begin	 at	 a	 certain	 point	 in	 life	 as	 a	 result	 of	 certain
situations,	 and	 that	 the	 particular	 time	 and	 situatio	 n	 must	 be	 dealt	 with	 in	 order	 to
remove	the	problems.	This	may	be	so	 for	particular	problems,	but	suffering	begins	 long
before	childhood,	 long	before	birth.	No	matter	how	perfect	 the	childhood,	everyone	will
still	have	problems.

Of	course	 this	doesn’t	mean	 that	we	should	not	deal	with	difficulties.	We	must,	and	 the
more	skillfully	we	do	so	the	more	beneficial	for	ourselves	and	for	the	people	to	whom	we
are	connected.	But	realizing	that	there	is	no	end	to	problems	in	samsara	should	make	it	a
little	easier	to	accept	them.	Some	people	think	that	to	accept	problems	is	to	support	them,
that	acceptance	means	not	addressing	problems,	but	that	 is	not	what	I	mean.	Accepting
that	 there	 will	 always	 be	 problems	 means	 opening	 to	 all	 of	 life,	 not	 only	 to	 what	 is
positive,	but	to	everything.

Dzogchen	 does	 not	 attempt	 to	 overcome	 problems	 or	 correct	 their	 causes,	 nor	 does	 it
renounce	problems	or	attempt	to	transform	them.	In	the	pure	Dzogchen	view,	there	is	no
such	thing	as	a	problem.	When	a	thought	or	feeling	or	sensation	arises	it	is	left	as	it	is.	It
does	not	cause	a	reaction.	And	if	there	is	a	reaction,	the	reaction	is	not	further	engaged.
The	practitioner	does	not	 relate	 to	what	arises	as	an	object	of	a	 subject	who	must	deal
with	 it.	 It	 just	 is—and	then	 it	 is	not.	Because	there	 is	no	engagement	on	the	part	of	 the
practitioner,	whatever	could	be	a	problem	dissolves	into	empty	awareness.	The	problem	is
directly	 experienced	 as	 empty	 luminosity	 and	 then	 has	 no	 effect.	 Because	 there	 is	 no
reaction,	there	is	no	new	karmic	trace.

In	Dzogchen,	 rather	 than	work	 on	problems,	 the	practitioner	works	 on	 recognizing	 and
abiding	in	the	natural	state	of	mind.	That	is	the	actual	resolution	to	problems,	not	in	their
particulars	but	as	an	end	to	“problems”	as	a	category	of	experience.	In	Dzogchen	it	is	said
that	to	know	one	is	to	know	all.	To	really	know	the	nature	of	any	problem	is	to	know	the
nature	of	all	problems—they	are	all	empty	luminosity.

Earlier,	I	wrote	that	all	manner	of	disturbances	could	be	described	as	an	imbalance	in	the
elements.	This	 is	also	true	 in	Dzogchen.	There	 is	no	better	way	to	balance	the	elements
than	to	abide	in	the	natural	state.	When	abiding	in	the	natural	state,	the	mind	is	clear,	the
prana	moves	 smoothly	 in	 the	 body,	 and	 the	 body	 functions	 better.	 Distraction	 from	 the
natural	 state	 means	 greater	 elemental	 imbalance.	 It	 is	 also	 true	 that	 balancing	 the
elements	through	any	other	means—diet	and	medicines,	shamanic	ritual,	tantric	practice,
and	 so	 on—make	 it	 easier	 for	 the	 practitioner	 to	 abide	 in	 the	 natural	 state	 once	 it	 is
recognized.

In	 the	 Dzogchen	 view,	 the	 goal	 is	 already	 present.	 Nothing	 has	 to	 be	 developed,	 only
recognized.	The	fundamental	practices	of	Dzogchen	are	not	aimed	at	developing	anything,
not	even	positive	qualities.	The	practice	is	simply	abiding	in	the	nature	of	mind	in	which
all	 qualities	 are	 already	 present	 and	 can	 spontaneously	 arise.	 Even	 the	 methods	 and
supportive	practices	are	not	essential.	Methods	can	become	an	obstacle	to	abiding	in	non-
dual	 awareness	 if	 the	 practitioner	 believes	 that	 one	must	 use	 the	 practice	 to	 renounce
something	or	transform	something.	Practices	are	only	used	to	connect	to	the	natural	state
and	stabilize	in	it.

When	I	first	began	to	teach	in	the	West,	I	did	so	in	a	traditional	way.	This	usually	meant
explaining	what	was	in	a	particular	text	and	adding	my	commentary.	Then	it	was	up	to	the
student	 to	understand	or	not.	But	as	 I	 spent	more	 time	 in	 the	West	 I	began	 to	 see	 that
there	was	a	need	to	teach	about	the	teaching,	to	explain	how	to	develop	experience	and
how	to	apply	the	teachings	and	practices	to	the	situations	of	daily	life.	My	main	interest	is
in	teaching	what	can	be	useful	to	people,	what	can	help	them	heal	conflict,	work	through



their	 unhappiness,	 remove	 obstacles	 to	meditation,	 and	 develop	 stability	 in	 the	 natural
state.

Sometimes	 this	 means	 applying	 a	 very	 profound	 teaching	 to	 the	 psychological	 level	 of
experience	 even	 though	 the	 view	 of	 the	 teaching	 is	 beyond	 psychological	 or	 emotional
concerns,	 as	 is	 the	 case	with	Dzogchen.	 The	 view	 of	Dzogchen	 is	 the	 highest	 view,	 the
non-dual	view,	but	this	doesn’t	mean	that	 it	shouldn’t	affect	everyday	situations.	For	the
real	practitioner	it	affects	everything—every	relationship	and	every	situation.

The	point	 of	 the	practice	 is	 to	 stop	being	 the	person	who	has	problems,	 and	 instead	 to
abide	 fully	 in	 the	 nature	 of	 mind	 where	 there	 are	 neither	 problems	 nor	 a	 separate
individual	to	struggle	with	them.

DISSOLVING	SAMSARA

In	 the	 teachings	 of	 the	Great	 Perfection	 there	 is	 the	 concept	 of	 lhundrup,	 spontaneous
perfection	 or	 spontaneous	 presence	 that	 characterizes	 all	 phenomena,	 including
happiness	 and	 suffering.	 Whatever	 arises	 in	 experience	 is	 perfect	 just	 as	 it	 is.	 All
phenomena	are	a	manifestation	of	the	five	pure	elemental	lights	and	from	the	five	lights
all	 the	 qualities	 of	 nirvana	 ceaselessly	 manifest.	 It	 is	 only	 because	 we	 are	 trapped	 in
erroneous	dualistic	views	that	we	engage	in	an	ultimately	false	struggle	with	experience.
We	only	need	to	wake—like	from	a	dream—for	it	to	end,	and	when	it	does	we	realize	that
it	was	never	real.	But	until	we	awaken,	we	suffer.

The	world	we	experience,	the	world	we	perceive	and	think	we	know,	has	developed	over
time.	We	have	substantialized	it,	made	it	concrete	and	distinctive,	a	dualistic	world	of	“you
and	me.”	Internal	obscurations	 in	the	moving	mind	have	resulted	in	apparently	negative
external	 phenomena;	 reactions	 to	 apparently	 external	 phenomena	 have	 reinforced
internal	obscurations.	As	we	abide	in	the	nature	of	mind,	dissolving	experience	again	and
again	into	pure	luminosity,	experience	eventually	becomes	a	flow	of	light	rather	than	sol	id
forms,	pure	 sound	 rather	 than	noise	or	positive	and	negative	 speech,	pure	being	 rather
than	separate	 things	and	entities.	The	clarity	and	purity	of	 the	nature	of	mind	 result	 in
apparently	pure	external	phenomena.	And	the	experience	of	that	pure	luminosity	further
stabilizes	 the	 practitioner	 in	 the	 nature	 of	 mind.	 This	 is	 the	 best	 way	 to	 balance	 the
elements.

Lopon	 Tenzin	 Namdak	 Rinpoche’s	 translation	 of	 and	 commentary	 on	 Heart	 Drops	 of
Dharmakaya	 (Ithaca,	 NY:	 Snow	 Lion	 Publications,	 2002)	 contains	 instructions	 on	 the
rushen	practices,	which	are	important	foundational	practices	in	Dzogchen.	Rushen	means
to	separate	or	discriminate,	and	the	rushen	practices	are	meant	to	clarify	experiences	of
the	pure	and	 impure.	They	 lead	 the	practitioner	 to	 recognize	 the	nature	of	mind	 rather
than	to	be	continually	distracted	by	what	arises	as	experience	in	the	nature	of	mind.	There
are	different	categories	of	rushen:	outer,	inner,	and	secret.

The	outer	practices	work	with	the	body.	For	example,	one	practice	involves	standing	in	a
difficult	yogic	posture,	the	vajra	pose,	that	generates	a	movement	of	energy	in	the	body
and	 results	 in	 three	 benefits:	 the	 heat	 generated	 burns	 karma	 that	 affects	 the	 body	 so
there	 is	 less	 disease	 and	 so	 on;	 the	 energy	 aroused	 burns	 the	 karma	 that	 negatively
affects	the	energy	body;	and	if	the	practitioner	remains	in	rigpa	while	holding	the	posture,
the	karma	that	generates	mental	disturbance	and	defects	in	the	view	is	burned.

When	the	posture	cannot	be	further	maintained,	the	practitioner	collapses.	In	the	moment
of	exhaustion	there	is	again	an	opportunity	for	impure	or	pure	experience.	If	the	first,	the
practitioner	 is	 distracted	 by	 the	 release	 and	 is	 lost	 in	 the	 experience—this	 is	 like	 the
forgetfulness	 in	 any	 ordinary	 exhaustion;	 if	 the	 latter,	 the	 practitioner	 abides	 in	 pure
presence.

The	inner	rushen	practices	work	on	the	energetic	level.	The	syllable	HUNG	 is	visualized
and	 moved	 in	 accord	 with	 the	 mind	 and	 breath,	 sometimes	 gently	 and	 sometimes
wrathfully.	The	peaceful	practices	gently	integrate	all	appearances	with	light;	the	wrathful
practices	 forcefully	 destroy	 appearances	 and	 dissolve	 them	 in	 space.	 The	 practices	 are
done	 many,	 many	 times.	 Each	 time	 that	 blocks,	 obstacles,	 and	 identifications	 are
represented	by	images	and	destroyed,	the	habitual	grasping	in	relation	to	them	weakens.
This	is	not	a	logical	or	rational	process—things	and	identities,	represented	as	images,	are
simply	 integrated	 with	 light	 or	 destroyed	 or	 dissolved.	 With	 nothing	 left	 to	 hold,	 the
practitioner	recognizes	intrinsic	awareness,	rigpa,	however	briefly.



The	Vajra	position	from	the	Practice	of	Rushen.

The	 secret	 rushen	 works	 directly	 with	 the	 mind.	 An	 inquiry	 is	 made	 into	 experience:
Where	do	thoughts	arise?	abide?	dissolve?	When	we	look	for	the	mind,	nothing	 is	 found
and	 the	not	 finding	 is	very	clear.	That	 is,	what	 is	 found	 is	 the	clarity	of	pure	space,	 the
nature	of	mind.	If	we	recognize	that	space,	we	have	found	the	nature	of	mind.	If	we	do	not
recognize	our	own	nature,	the	moving	mind	continues	to	search.

Practices	like	the	rushen	are	preliminary	practices.	The	real	practice	of	Dzogchen	cannot
be	described	accurately	because	the	words	are	only	meaningful	after	one	recognizes	what
they	 point	 toward.	 Most	 spiritual	 practices	 work	 to	 generate	 experiences,	 to	 develop
certain	 positive	 qualities	 through	 which	 one	 finds	 oneself	 closer	 to	 one’s	 true	 nature.
Dzogchen	 practice	 is	 not	 about	 generating	 anything.	 It	 is	 not	 about	 any	 particular
experience	but	is	the	recognition	of	the	basis	of	experience.	All	visions	of	the	five	external
elements	 and	 the	 five	 internal	 elements,	 all	 thoughts	 and	experiences,	 dissolve	 into	 the
base.	When	all	experiences	stop,	even	the	experiences	of	unconsciousness,	sleep,	and	the
sense	 of	 self,	 what	 remains	 is	 inseparable	 emptiness	 and	 luminosity.	 Abiding	 in	 this	 is
Dzogchen	practice.

Dzogchen	 practice	 can	 be	 summed	 up	 like	 this:	 Recognize	 non-dual	 innate	 awareness,
dissolve	all	identity	in	it,	and	abide	without	distraction.	This	main	practice	is	described	as
having,	 and	 often	 taught	 as,	 two	 parts:	 Cutting	 Through,	 trekchöd,	 the	 practice	 of
continuously	cutting	through	distraction	in	order	to	abide	in	the	natural	state	of	mind;	and
the	 practice	 of	 Crossing	 Over,	 tögal,	 the	 visionary	 practices	 that	 naturally	 arise	 from
Cutting	Through.	But	these	are	two	aspects	of	the	same	fundamental	practice,	which	is	to
integrate	oneself	and	all	phenomena	of	experience	 into	 the	natural	state	of	mind.	When
this	 is	 accomplished,	 the	 elements	 in	 the	 dimension	 of	 the	 individual	 are	 naturally	 and
spontaneously	balanced.	The	practitioner	 in	Dzogchen	works	 in	 this	secret	dimension	of
the	elements	in	which	the	elements	are	luminosity,	the	radiance	of	being.

Cutting	 Through	 integrates	 the	 practitioner	 with	 the	 space	 element.	 It	 emphasizes	 the
primordial	 purity	 (kha	dag)	 of	 emptiness.	 The	 practitioner	must	 no	 longer	 identify	with
what	arises	in	experience—including	the	subject—and	instead	abides	as	the	empty	nature
of	mind.	 All	 phenomena	 is	 left	 to	 arise	 and	 pass	 away	without	 attachment	 or	 rejection,
without	a	subject	constituting	in	response	to	experience.	The	practitioner	abides	in	pure
space.	 “Abiding	 in	 space”	means	 being	 the	 empty-aware	 space,	 recognizing	 innate	 non-
dual	awareness	and	dissolving	identity	in	it.

Crossing	Over	emphasizes	luminosity.	It	is	the	practice	of	light.	Cutting	Through	focuses
on	abiding	in	the	empty	nature	of	mind;	Crossing	Over	integrates	the	expressions	of	the
energy	of	the	elements	into	the	nature	of	mind.	In	one	sense,	trekchöd	avoids	involvement
and	 tögal	 is	 involved	 through	 integrating	 what	 arises.	 When	 abiding	 in	 non-dual
awareness—Cutting	 Through—experience	 is	 a	 flow	 of	 empty	 phenomena,	 an	 unceasing
flow	of	light.	Allowing	experience	to	manifest	without	being	distracted	from	the	nature	of
mind	is	the	practice	of	Crossing	Over.

Trekchöd	 and	 tögal,	 though	 often	 taught	 sequentially,	 are	 inseparable.	 Without	 stable
trekchöd	 there	 is	 no	 tögal	 and	when	 trekchöd	 is	 stable	 everything	 that	 arises	 is	 tögal.
Although	it	is	not	traditionally	taught	this	way,	all	experience	integrated	into	the	natural
state—experience	 in	 which	 the	 practitioner	 does	 not	 become	 distracted	 and	 does	 not
return	to	the	dualistic	state—is	tögal	vision.	One	reason	for	the	separation	of	trekchöd	and
tögal	in	teaching	is	to	allow	particular	practices	related	to	tögal,	such	as	the	dark	retreat,
to	be	taught	separately.



Once	 a	 practitioner	 is	 introduced	 to	 the	 nature	 of	mind	 by	 his	 or	 her	 teacher,	 practice
follows	 a	 pattern	 described	 in	 detail	 in	 the	 A-khrid	 teachings,	 one	 of	 the	 three	 main
Dzogchen	 transmissions	 in	Bön.	The	pattern	 is:	abide,	dissolve,	continue.	The	Dzogchen
practitioner’s	goal	and	practice	is	to	always	abide	in	the	nature	of	mind.	When	he	or	she	is
integrated	with	 the	nature	of	mind,	whatever	arises	 self-liberates,	dissolving	 into	empty
luminosity.	However,	when	one	is	distracted	from	the	nature	of	mind,	the	duality	of	subject
and	 object	 arises.	 Then	 one	 must	 use	 intention	 to	 return	 to	 pure	 presence.	 Then	 the
practitioner	 continues	 in	 the	 natural	 state	 until	 distracted	 again	 and	 the	 process	 is
repeated.	Abide	in	the	nature	of	mind,	dissolve	distraction,	continue	in	the	natural	state.

APPRECIATING	THE	SPACE	ELEMENT

Often	I	hear	people	say	they	want	to	be	more	grounded,	more	open,	more	accepting,	and
freer.	They	usually	think	they	must	rearrange	something	in	their	life	to	accomplish	this	or
develop	 something	 new,	 but	 these	 are	 qualities	 of	 their	 own	 nature.	 They	 are	 qualities
found	in	the	spaciousness	of	the	nature	of	mind.	In	order	to	recognize	these	qualities,	one
must	recognize	and	abide	in	the	essence	of	the	space	element,	in	the	empty	luminosity	of
the	natural	 state.	Many	 teachings	 talk	 about	 this	 space,	 about	 emptiness,	 but	generally
people	 don’t	 appreciate	 space	 as	 space.	 They	 have	more	 appreciation	 for	 the	 things	 in
space.

In	 Dzogchen,	 the	 space	 element	 is	 the	most	 important	 element	 to	 work	with.	 Space	 is
boundless,	beyond	form	and	color	and	shape,	beyond	birth	and	death.	It	is	the	basis	of	the
four	 external	 elements—earth,	water,	 fire,	 and	air.	 It	 is	 the	great	 source	 from	which	all
environments	and	beings	arise,	abide,	and	dissolve.	Space	is	the	Great	Mother.

Sometimes	the	Bön	are	called	“sky-worshipers,”	but	that’s	not	quite	right.	What	is	true	is
that	 Bön	 recognizes	 the	 sacredness	 of	 space	 and	 that	 the	 sky	 is	 the	 external
representation	of	 the	 space	 	 of	 the	 kunzhi,	 the	basis	 of	 all.	 Though	everything	 that	 has
ever	existed,	does	exist,	or	will	exist,	arises	in	space,	space	is	unstained.	It	neither	judges
nor	discriminates.	It	does	not	react	and	is	not	conditioned.	It	remains	pure	and	luminous.

These	 statements	 also	 apply	 to	 the	 nature	 of	mind.	 Everything	 arises	 in	 it	 but	 it	 is	 not
conditioned.	Everything	is	born	and	dies	in	it	but	it	is	not	born	and	does	not	die.	Although
external	 space	 is	 not	 the	 nature	 of	mind,	 integrating	with	 it	 in	 experience	 can	 help	 us
recognize	the	nature	of	mind.

Most	people	are	uncomfortable	in	too	much	space.	If	a	house	is	too	empty,	it	is	considered
barren.	If	a	room	is	too	empty,	it	needs	furniture	or	screens—something	to	break	it	up,	to
make	the	space	smaller.	It’s	easy	to	feel	disconnected	in	too	much	space,	so	we	fill	it	with
things	we	 can	 connect	 to:	 the	 bed,	 the	 kitchen	 table,	 the	 couch,	 the	 shrine,	 art	 on	 the
walls,	books	on	the	shelf,	mementos.

This	is	how	we	live	internally,	too.	If	someone	says	you	have	an	empty	mind,	it	is	an	insult
unless	you	are	a	practitioner.	An	empty	life	is	lonely	and	sad.	Feeling	empty	is	associated
with	depression.	When	we	start	to	feel	empty,	we	go	to	the	movies	or	read	a	book	or	turn
on	the	television	or	pick	up	the	phone	or	shop.	We	don’t	want	emptiness,	silence,	stillness
—or	we	want	to	visit	them	and	then	leave.	Even	when	going	on	vacation	to	“just	sit	around
and	 do	 nothing,”	 we	 end	 up	 reading,	 swimming,	 playing	 games,	 eating	 big	meals,	 and
drinking	wine.	We	don’t	really	want	to	do	nothing,	and	if	we	see	someone	doing	nothing
and	staring	into	space	too	much,	we	think	that	person	has	a	problem.

One	of	 the	most	 important	meditations	 in	Buddhism	is	on	emptiness.	Often	people	don’t
like	 that	 word;	 fullness	 sounds	 better,	 or	 suchness.	 But	 it’s	 the	 same.	 So	 what	 does
emptiness	really	mean	in	Buddhism?	Wisdom.	Wisdom	is	the	realization	of	emptiness,	the
realization	of	shunyata.	Wisdom	is	knowing	the	empty	essence,	not	the	qualities	that	arise
in	the	empty	essence.	The	realization	of	qualities	is	called	the	method.	It	is	the	other	half
of	 the	 path.	 Developing	 and	 realizing	 qualities	 like	 compassion	 and	 generosity	 is	 the
means,	and	realizing	the	empty	space	in	which	qualities	arise	is	wisdom.

If	 you	 have	 practiced	 dharma	 for	 a	 long	 time,	 you’ve	 heard	 a	 lot	 about	 emptiness.
Probably	 every	 teacher	 you’ve	 ever	 studied	with,	 every	 dharma	book	 you’ve	 read,	 talks
about	emptiness.	But	has	it	changed	you?	You	may	be	able	to	explain	the	interdependent
nature	of	all	phenomena	or	lack	of	inherent	existence,	but	if	this	is	just	theory	it	may	not
have	much	of	an	effect	 in	your	 life.	Even	if	studying	dharma	and	philosophy	 is	the	main
activity	 of	 your	 life,	 if	 you	 believe	 that	 the	 empty	 essence	 is	 something	 far	 away	 in
experience	and	almost	impossible	to	realize,	then	you	will	not	experience	it	directly.	This



is	unfortunate	because	the	luminous	emptiness	is	your	own	nature.	It	is	not	far	or	remote
—the	problem	with	recognizing	it	is	that	it	is	so	close	that	it	is	hard	not	to	look	beyond	it.

Realizing	 the	 nature	 of	 mind,	 we	 find	 that	 what	 we	 are	 in	 the	 inseparable	 state	 of
awareness	and	emptiness.	When	we	realize	 that,	we	 realize	 the	essence	of	 space.	 If	we
abide	in	the	nature	of	mind,	merged	with	space	rather	than	identified	with	what	arises	in
space,	there	is	an	effect	in	life.	There	is	nothing	to	defend,	no	self	that	needs	protecting,
because	our	own	nature	 is	spacious	and	can	accommodate	everything.	Emptiness	needs
no	defense.	Space	cannot	be	damaged.	No	one	can	do	anything	to	it.	An	opinion	or	image
can	 be	 attacked	 and	 hurt	 but	 the	 space	 in	 which	 the	 opinion	 or	 image	 exists	 is
indestructible.	It	does	not	age,	does	not	develop	or	deteriorate,	isn’t	born,	and	doesn’t	die.
Through	 this	 realization,	 confidence	 and	 fearlessness	 arise.	 Though	 experience	 arises
without	 ceasing,	 we	 remain	 connected	 to	 the	 unchanging	 space	 in	 which	 it	 arises.	We
need	 not	 try	 to	 own	 it	 or	 claim	 it.	 It	 is	 here	 already,	 beyond	 hope	 and	 fear.	When	 the
nature	of	mind	is	realized,	the	spontaneous	perfection	of	all	phenomena	is	understood	and
primordial	purity	is	realized.

The	practitioner	of	Dzogchen	 first	 tries	 to	understand	 this	 space	of	 the	nature	of	mind.
Then	he	or	she	must	recognize	it	through	meditation	and	the	pointing	out	instructions	of
the	 teacher,	 then	 develop	 the	 connection	 to	 it.	 Finally,	 the	 practitioner	 integrates	 with
space,	which	is	what	“abiding	in	the	nature	of	mind”	means.	It’s	not	that	the	practitioner
becomes	something	different.	We	have	to	use	the	language	of	development	to	talk	about
the	path,	about	how	to	get	somewhere	we	want	to	go.	But	really	there	is	no	place	to	go,
there	is	nothing	to	develop.	It’s	a	question	of	waking,	of	recognizing	what	already	is.

When	the	space	of	the	nature	of	mind	is	realized	there	is	still	a	flow.	This	is	the	luminosity;
there	 is	 movement,	 sensation,	 liveliness.	 Experience	 is	 richer	 than	 it	 was,	 not	 poorer.
Qualities	 arise	 endlessly.	 Compassion	 or	 sadness,	 anger	 or	 love	 may	 arise,	 but	 the
practitioner	doesn’t	lose	the	connection	to	the	space	from	which	they	arise.

Space	is	the	ground	of	everything,	the	fundamental	reality.	We	generally	think	of	earth	as
representing	groundedness,	and	 it	does	as	 long	as	we	believe	ourselves	 to	be	one	 thing
separate	 from	 everything	 else.	 In	 duality,	 earth	 is	 the	 ground,	 space	 is	 the	 absence	 of
ground.	 But	 in	 Dzogchen,	 space	 is	 the	 ground.	 The	 practitioner	 merged	 with	 space	 is
more	grounded	than	earth	because	he	or	she	is	the	space	in	which	earth	exists;	 is	more
comfortable	 than	 water	 because	 space	 has	 no	 obstructions;	 is	 more	 flexible	 than	 air
because	air	can	go	no	place	that	space	is	not	already;	is	more	creative	than	fire	because
space	gives	rise	to	fire.	Space	is	what	we	truly	are.

INTEGRATING	WITH	SPACE	AND	THE	OTHER	FOUR	LIGHTS

It’s	almost	impossible	to	experience	the	pure	light	of	experience	if	we	do	not	have	a	deep
connection	 to	pure	 space.	 In	 the	Tibetan	 tradition	we	usually	 say	 it	 this	way:	One	must
recognize	and	abide	in	the	nature	of	mind	in	order	to	recognize	and	exercise	the	energy	of
the	nature	of	mind.

The	experience	of	light	can	help	us	develop	the	experience	of	space	just	as	the	experience
of	 space	can	 lead	 to	 the	 recognition	of	 the	pure	clarity	of	 light.	Try	paying	attention	 to
experience,	 right	 now,	 as	 if	 everything	 were	 only	 light.	 Go	 beyond	 form,	 beyond	 the
limitations	of	the	eye,	beyond	the	duality	of	sense	and	sense	object.	Experience	is	a	flow	of
light	and	awareness.	That’s	all,	and	it	includes	everything.	This	is	a	practice	that	can	be
done	 anytime.	 Nothing	 changes	 but	 everything	 is	 different.	 Instead	 of	 just	 seeing	 the
form,	see	the	light.	Instead	of	just	hearing	the	words,	see	the	light.	Instead	of	just	tasting
dinner,	see	the	light.	It’s	all	light	and	it	can	be	“seen”	in	every	sense.	Go	beyond	dividing
experience	 into	 different	 sense	 fields,	 into	 inner	 and	 outer,	 into	 me	 and	 not-me.
Experience	is	unified.

Working	with	 the	 sensual	world	 is	 important	and	helpful,	 as	 is	working	with	em	otional
experiences	and	mental	events.	When	emotions	arise—even	powerful,	overwhelming	ones
—they,	too,	are	simply	light.	When	hatred	or	jealousy	or	joy	arises,	they	are	all	light.	Abide
in	space,	experience	light;	abide	as	light,	experience	space.

It	can	be	helpful	to	remember	that	the	heart	center	is	the	place	to	connect	to	space	and
light.	 It’s	 the	 place	 of	 devotion,	 the	 place	 where	 the	 real	 master	 resides.	 It	 is	 where
Samantabhadra	and	Tapihritsa	are.	The	real	master	is	that	light	in	the	heart,	the	non-dual
awareness,	rigpa.	Connect	your	mind	to	your	heart	and	then,	keeping	the	connection	to
pure	 presence,	 open	 the	 senses	 and	 relax.	 Experience	 the	 flow	 of	 light	 in	 space.	 Stay



open.	Dzogchen	is	about	openness.	The	more	things	are	constricted	and	substantialized,
the	harder	it	is	to	connect	to	space	and	light.

When	you	are	too	distracted	to	remain	present	in	this	way,	pray.	Prayer	is	more	powerful
than	we	usually	think	it	is.	Pray	for	the	connection	to	the	inner	light.	Prayer	binds	thought
and	 directs	 it,	 pulls	 us	 out	 of	 the	 drama	 of	 emotion,	 and	 provides	 relief	 and	 direction.
Human	beings	are	always	busy,	and	 it’s	better	 to	be	busy	with	prayer	 than	to	be	 lost	 in
fantasies	of	the	past	or	future.

Just	as	staying	connected	to	 light	 is	helpful,	so	 is	remaining	connected	to	space.	Rather
than	keeping	attention	only	on	the	objects	in	space,	try	to	spend	a	whole	day	aware	of	the
space	 that	 objects	 are	 in,	 the	 space	 in	 which	 thoughts	 arise,	 the	 space	 in	 which	 the
furniture	 in	your	room	sits,	 the	space	 in	which	 the	sky	 is	blue.	We	 live	 in	space	all	day,
sleep	 in	space,	and	manifest	dreams	 in	space.	Without	a	conscious	connection	 to	space,
we	are	lost.	With	connection	to	space,	we	can	never	be	lost.

In	the	Cutting	Through	practice,	sky	gazing	is	important.	If	we	sit	and	gaze	into	the	sky—
not	focusing	on	clouds	or	birds—we’re	not	looking	at	substance.	We’re	looking	into	space.
Space	doesn’t	do	anything,	it	doesn’t	say	anything,	but	it	has	a	profound	effect.	If	we	have
stability	in	the	practice,	connection	to	external	space	connects	us	with	internal	space.

In	 practice	 we	 can	 connect	 with	 internal	 space	 and	 then	 external	 space,	 or	 use	 the
experience	of	external	space	to	connect	to	internal	space.	It	doesn’t	matter	which,	as	the
point	is	to	recognize	that	external	space,	internal	space,	and	the	space	of	the	mind	are	all
the	same	empty,	luminous	space.	Abiding	in	the	space	of	the	nature	of	mind,	we	not	only
are	free,	we	are	freedom.

THE	DARK	RETREAT:	VISIONS	OF	THE	FIVE	ELEMENTS

After	the	Dzogchen	practitioner	has	been	introduced	to	the	natural	state	of	mind	by	the
master,	 he	 or	 she	 is	 taught	 the	 Crossing	 Over	 practices	 of	 tögal:	 the	 dark	 retreat,	 sky
gazing,	and	sun	gazing.	Tögal	practice	is	very	much	about	the	elements.

In	the	dark	retreat	the	practitioner	spends	months	practicing	in	a	room	or	cave	into	which
not	 even	 the	 slightest	 light	 enters.	 It	 is	 commonly	 understood	 that	 the	 lack	 of	 physical
light	 can	 lead	 to	depression	and	 claustrophobia,	 and	 there	are	 therapies	 for	depression
that	are	based	on	exposing	people	to	light.	But	when	abiding	in	pure	luminous	presence	in
the	dark	retreat,	practitioners	do	not	become	claustrophobic	or	depressed,	even	 though
they	 are	 in	 total	 darkness	 in	 a	 small	 room	 for	 a	 long	 time	 (in	 Bön	 the	 dark	 retreat	 is
traditionally	forty-nine	days	and	is	often	done	for	longer).	In	fact,	there	is	sometimes	the
opposite	problem.	Because	so	much	is	happening,	the	practitioner	may	be	excited	and	the
thoughts	become	wild	and	hard	to	control.	Trekchöd	means	stabilization	in	space,	a	state
that	 results	 in	 no	 claustrophobia.	 And	 tögal	 is	 the	 manifestation	 of	 light.	 In	 the	 small
physical	space	of	the	dark	retreat	there	is	a	lot	of	space	and	light—the	space	of	the	base
of	existence	and	the	 illumination	of	 intrinsic	awarenes	s.	 Just	as	external	 light	keeps	us
from	becoming	depressed,	the	internal	light	protects	us.	The	vitality	of	the	mind,	of	rigpa,
gives	the	body	vitality	that	comes	from	inside	rather	than	outside.

Anyone,	 practitioner	 or	 not,	 can	put	 themselves	 into	 a	 pitch-black	 environment	 and	 see
lights.	And	if	they	stay	long	enough,	they	will	begin	to	hallucinate.	This	is	not	tögal.	If	the
practitioner	has	not	had	proper	instruction,	has	not	had	the	pointing	out	instructions,	and
cannot	 abide	 in	 the	 natural	 state,	 the	 visions	 that	 arise	 are	 simply	 mental	 projections
shaped	by	karmic	traces.	Without	trekchöd	there	is	no	tögal,	and	if	the	practitioner	is	not
abiding	in	the	natural	state,	trekchöd	has	not	been	accomplished.

This	is	analogous	to	the	yogic	practices	of	dream	and	sleep.	When	ordinary	dreams	arise,
they	are	just	dreams,	stories	manifested	by	the	mind’s	interaction	with	karmic	traces	and
karmic	prana.	But	when	the	dreamer	abides	in	the	natural	state,	dreams	arise	as	dreams
of	 clarity,	 dreams	 from	 below	 the	 surface	 of	 individual	 karma,	 and	 they	 often	 contain
wisdom	from	beyond	the	boundaries	of	the	individual.	The	situation	with	sleep	is	similar.
When	an	ordinary	person	sleeps,	he	or	she	falls	into	a	state	of	unconsciousness.	When	a
practitioner	stable	in	the	nature	of	mind	sleeps,	the	body	and	the	conceptual	mind	sleep
but	 the	practitioner	remains	 fully	 integrated	with	 the	clear	 light	and	abides	as	non-dual
awareness.

In	the	dark	retreat,	if	the	practitioner	abides	in	the	natural	state,	the	elements	come	into
balance.	In	one	of	the	practices	often	prescribed	for	the	dark	retreat,	the	practitioner	uses
five	postures,	one	for	each	element,	to	open	particular	channels	in	the	body,	thus	affecting



the	 flow	 of	 prana.	We	 say	 that	 the	 posture,	 held	while	 the	 practitioner	 abides	 in	 rigpa,
evokes	elemental	energies	and	that	the	particular	types	of	gazes—again	there	are	five—
are	gates	 for	 the	energies	 that	allow	 the	elemental	 energies	 to	manifest	 externally.	The
internal	processes	of	 the	elemental	energies	are	 reflected	out,	 into	 the	black	room,	and
are	reflected	back	to	the	practitioner	as	visions	and	experiences.

The	Zhang	Zhung	Nyan	Gyud	describes	five	different	stages	of	the	tögal	visions.	There	are
five	 stages	 because	 they	 relate	 to	 the	 elements,	 from	 earth	 to	 space.	 The	 progressive
stages	are	the	signs	of	the	development	of	a	more	profound	connection	to	the	elements.
As	 we	 progress	 on	 the	 spiritual	 path,	 internal	 changes	 are	 manifested	 in	 increased
positive	 experiences	 in	 our	 daily	 lives.	 Relationships	 become	 easier,	 negative	 emotions
have	less	power,	and	so	on.	In	the	Crossing	Over	practices,	the	positive	internal	changes
that	 result	 from	 the	 practice	 also	 manifest	 externally,	 but	 as	 visions.	 In	 all	 the	 tögal
practices—dark	 retreat,	 sun	 gazing,	 space	 gazing—the	 practitioner	 is	 trying	 to	 connect
with	the	pure	essence	of	the	elements,	the	five	pure	lights,	and	the	visions	are	the	signs
that	 the	process	 is	occurring.	The	visions	are	not	 the	point	of	 the	practice,	 the	 internal
changes	are,	but	the	visions	are	a	way	to	check	on	the	progress.

Generally,	the	visions	begin	with	light	and	patterns	of	light.	The	light	is	colored—often	one
or	two	colors	will	dominate,	or	a	color	may	not	manifest	at	all.	There	are	specific	shapes
and	colors	associated	with	each	element	as	it	begins	to	manifest	in	its	purer	form:	square
yellow	 shapes	 for	 earth;	 circular	 blue	 shapes	 for	 water;	 triangular	 red	 shapes	 for	 fire;
green	 rectangular	 shapes	 for	 air;	 and	 white	 semicircular	 shapes	 for	 space.	 Eventually
fragments	of	 images	appear,	usually	 fleeting	and	unclear.	Over	 time	 they	become	whole
and	 stable.	The	progression	 is	not	 random.	As	 the	practice	deepens,	 the	main	 channels
and	 chakras	 open	 and	 karmic	 blocks	 and	 habitual	 tendencies	 dissolve	 in	 the	 nature	 of
mind.	 The	 obscurations	 that	 clothe	 the	 pure	 elements	 in	 apparent	 substantiality	 are
cleared	and	the	visions	become	correspondingly	purer.	They	become	more	complete	and
vivid,	and	the	colors	are	more	balanced.	Visions	of	deities,	goddesses,	mandalas,	sacred
syllables,	and	symbols	arise.

In	daily	life,	as	in	the	dark	retreat,	how	we	react	to	what	arises	in	experience	determines
whether	we	remain	deluded	or	move	toward	realization	of	the	truth.	If	we	are	caught	in
the	 dualistic	 view	 of	 the	 moving	 mind,	 the	 five	 elemental	 energies	 are	 experienced	 as
substantial.	 If	 we	 are	 stable	 in	 the	 nature	 of	 mind,	 what	 appears	 to	 be	 substantial
dissolves	back	into	pure	light.	One	way	moves	toward	bondage	to	karmic	tendencies,	the
other	 moves	 toward	 freedom	 from	 conditioning.	 If	 we	 abide	 in	 dualism,	 the	 five	 lights
become	the	five	negative	emotions.	If	we	abide	in	the	natural	state,	the	five	lights	become
the	five	wisdoms.	In	the	dark	retreat,	we	can	find	out	where	we	are	in	terms	of	practice
because	 the	 level	 of	 practice	will	 be	 reflected	 in	what	manifests	 and	 how	we	 relate	 to
what	manifests.

At	the	highest	level	of	tögal	practice	the	elements	are	completely	balanced.	All	experience
is	integrated	with	the	natural	state.	Although	we	usually	experience	the	body	as	solid,	it,
also,	 is	a	manifestation	of	elemental	 light.	When	merged	entirely	with	space,	there	is	no
experience	of	 the	body	separate	from	the	field	of	undivided	experience.	 It’s	not	that	the
body	is	gone,	but	it	is	experienced	as	a	body	of	light.	Ultimately	this	is	how	the	rainbow
body	(‘ja’	lus)	 is	attained.	As	described	earlier	 in	 this	book,	 this	 is	 the	particular	sign	of
enlightenment	 in	Dzogchen—the	 release	of	 the	elements	of	 the	body	at	death	 into	 their
pure	form	as	colored	lights.

Ordinarily,	 our	 sense	 of	 who	 we	 are	 depends	 on	 our	 environment:	 our	 bodies,
relationships,	 circumstances,	 thoughts,	 and	memories.	When	we	 abide	 in	 the	 nature	 of
mind,	 the	 images	 and	 thoughts	 that	 represent	 our	 identities	 dissolve	 into	 the	 empty
essence.	How	we	 relate	 to	what	manifests	 from	 that	 space	 determines	whether	we	 are
caught	up	in	delusion	or	freed	in	wisdom.	Whatever	experience	arises	to	one	not	abiding
in	the	natural	mind—even	a	vision	of	buddhas	or	pure	lands—is	a	dualistic	vision	rooted	in
the	delusion	of	self	and	other.	Whatever	experience	arises	for	the	practitioner	stable	in	the
nature	of	mind	is	a	tögal	vision.



FIVE

FINAL	WORDS
As	practitioners,	we	 are	 taught	 to	 think	 about	 the	 gift	 of	 the	 precious	 human	body.	We
have	 been	 born	 in	 places	 where	 the	 dharma	 is	 taught,	 at	 a	 time	 when	 teachers	 are
accessible	 and	 where	 transmission	 is	 obtainable.	 We	 live	 where	 there	 is	 the	 political
freedom	 to	 follow	 our	 spiritual	 paths.	 Our	 living	 conditions	 are	 good	 and	 we	 have	 the
leisure	to	practice.

What	we	often	lack	is	the	recognition	of	the	gifts	we	have	already	received.	Sometimes	we
remember	how	good	our	lives	are	when	we	are	brushed	by	tragedy,	but	then,	caught	up
again	in	our	normal	lives,	we	forget.	We	are	driven	away	from	gratitude	and	appreciation
by	dark	and	negative	 forces,	by	habitual	dissatisfaction	and	constant	 stimulation.	When
others	have	more	than	us,	we	feel	envy,	but	 in	a	world	where	so	many	people	have	 less
than	us,	we	often	don’t	recognize	how	fortunate	we	are.

The	teachings	often	focus	on	view,	meditation,	and	behavior.	What	this	means	is	that	the
way	we	see	determines	how	we	feel	and	think.	And	how	we	feel	and	think	determines	how
we	act.	When	we	look	from	a	dualistic	viewpoint,	we	see	an	imperfect	world	and	we	live	as
troubled,	 imperfect	 beings	 in	 that	 imperf	 ect	 world.	 When	 we	 see	 the	 world	 in	 its
perfection,	 just	 as	 it	 is,	 we	 are	 buddhas,	 living	 in	 a	 pure	 land,	 surrounded	 by	 other
buddhas.

Until	we	have	pure	vision	and	realize	the	perfection	of	the	world	and	the	beings	in	it,	it	is
helpful	 if	we	 can	 accept	 the	 imperfections	 of	 the	world	 as	 a	 natural	 part	 of	 life,	 as	 the
material	with	which	we	can	work.	When	we	turn	away	from	any	aspect	of	the	world,	we
turn	away	from	parts	of	ourselves.	By	opening	to	the	world	and	accepting	 it	as	 it	 is,	we
open	to	deeper	dimensions	of	our	own	being.	Complete	acceptance	is	the	end	of	hope	and
fear,	the	end	of	fantasies	of	the	past	and	future.	It	is	living	entirely	in	the	present,	in	what
actually	is.

Growing	up	in	a	monastery	with	highly	realized	and	educated	teachers	nearby	led	me	to
dedicate	my	 life	 to	 learning,	practicing	dharma,	and,	 for	 the	 last	 fifteen	years,	 teaching
others.	In	my	own	studies	of	the	shamanic	(causal)	vehicles,	sutra,	tantra,	and	Dzogchen,	I
have	become	aware	of	how	deeply	connected	all	the	different	vehicles	and	practices	are,
even	 though	 there	 are	 philosophical	 differences.	 Experiencing	 this	 connection	 is
illuminating	 and	 joyful,	 and	when	 it	 is	 fully	 realized	 and	 understood,	 practice	 becomes
stronger	and	more	flexible.	We	can	know	what	practices	to	do	when.	And	we	can	adjust
the	 practices	 to	 overcome	 our	 elemental	 weaknesses	 and	 to	 build	 on	 our	 elemental
strengths.

One	way	of	understanding	this	connection	 is	 through	an	understanding	of	 the	elements.
Our	bodies	exist	as	the	play	of	the	elements.	We	move	through	the	energies	and	forces	of
the	elements	in	our	environment.	We	experience	the	subtle	elements	in	and	as	our	minds.
All	 time	 and	 space	 is	 a	 play	 of	 the	 elements.	 However	 subtle	 or	 gross	 the	 elemental
energies	 seem	 to	 be,	 they	 are	 essentially	 the	 five	 pure	 lights,	 the	 sacred	 fundamental
energies	of	all	that	exists.

No	matter	what	practice	I	do,	of	whatever	level,	I	know	that	I	am	trying	to	more	deeply
integrate	with	the	five	pure	lights.	Sometimes	I	have	to	work	with	balancing	the	elements
on	 a	 grosser	 level,	 sometimes	 in	 the	 energetic	 dimension,	 and	 sometimes	 on	 the	more
subtle	 levels	 of	 the	 mind.	 Whether	 I	 am	 working	 with	 a	 yidam	 or	 khandro,	 or	 with
movements	and	breathing,	I	am	always	moving	toward	the	fundamental	integration	that	is
the	goal	of	the	spiritual	journey.

I	hope	that	this	work	with	the	elements	will	serve	many	people	in	the	future,	bringing	to
them	physical,	emotional,	and	spiritual	healing.	I	plan	on	doing	more	research,	practice,
exploration,	and	work	with	people.	Eventually	my	students	and	myself	will	develop	a	site
devoted	 to	 elemental	 practice.	 We	 will	 construct	 houses—one	 for	 each	 element—of
particular	 materials,	 in	 particular	 shapes	 and	 colors.	 In	 them	 will	 be	 housed	 sacred
elemental	mandalas	empowered	by	the	elemental	deities.	It	is	our	hope	that	people	will	be
able	to	spend	time	there	in	order	to	reconnect	with	and	develop	the	elemental	energies	in
themselves.

I	strongly	believe	that	 if	more	people	 learn	these	ancient	teachings	and	 learn	when	and



how	 to	 apply	 them,	 they	 will	 improve	 their	 lives,	 overcome	 illnesses	 and	 obstacles,
increase	their	life-spans,	health,	personal	power,	and	fortunes,	and	develop	their	spiritual
lives.

Knowing	the	five	elements	gives	us	a	way	to	interact	with	the	world,	whichever	world	it	is
we	are	experiencing.	Knowing	the	elements	is	knowing	something	fundamental,	through
which	we	can	see	everything.	Knowing	how	to	work	with	the	elements	gives	us	a	key	to
working	with	all	aspects	of	our	lives,	positive	and	negative.

It	is	my	sincere	wish	that	all	of	us	quickly	realize	our	true	nature.	Until	that	time,	may	we
all	develop	compassion	and	love	for	all	beings.	May	we	open	to	the	unbounded	energy	and
wisdom	of	the	primordial	elements	whose	play	is	this	great	beauty	that	is	our	world	and
our	lives.

The	great	Bönpo	lama,	Yungdrung	Tenzing,	just	before	death	sat
upright	in	meditation	posture	in	Sikkim	at	the	S.T.N.M.	hospital,	asked
people	not	to	touch	his	body	for	three	days.	He	then	passed	through
the	outer	manifestations	of	death	(heart	and	breathing	stopped),	but
remained	in	the	meditation	posture	for	thirty-three	hours.	Tibetan
pilgrims	came	from	far	and	wide	to	drape	scarves	around	his	body

after	the	end	of	the	three	day	period.

Tenzin	Wangyal	Rinpoche	with	H.H.	the	Dalai	Lama	in	Dharamsala,
India.



GLOSSARY
bardo	(Tib:	bar	do;	Skt:	antarabhava).	Bardo	means	“in-between	state,”	and	refers	to	any
transitional	state	of	existence—life,	meditation,	dream,	death.	Most	commonly,	 the	word
refers	to	the	intermediate	state	between	death	and	rebirth.

bodhicitta	 (Tib:	byang	 chub	 sems,	 abbreviated	as	byang	sems).	 Awakened	mind.	Often
means	the	compassionate	mind	intending	to	attain	enlightenment	for	the	sake	of	others.
In	Dzogchen,	synonymous	with	innate	non-dual	awareness.

Bön	 (Tib:	 bon).	 Bön	 is	 the	 indigenous	 spiritual	 tradition	 of	 Tibet.	 It	 predates	 Indian
Buddhism.	Although	scholars	disagree	about	the	origin	of	Bön,	the	tradition	itself	claims
an	 unbroken	 lineage	 seventeen	 thousand	 years	 old.	 Similar	 to	 Tibetan	 Buddhist	 sects,
particularly	 the	 Nyingma,	 Bön	 is	 distinguished	 by	 a	 distinctive	 iconography,	 a	 rich
shamanic	 tradition,	 and	 a	 separate	 lineage	 reaching	 back	 to	 the	 Buddha	 Shenrab
Miwoche	rather	than	to	Shakyamuni	Buddha.

chakra	 (Tib:	 ‘khor	 lo;	 Skt:	 chakra).	 Literally,	 “wheel”	 or	 “circle.”	Chakra	 is	 a	 Sanskrit
word	referring	to	energetic	centers	in	the	body.	A	chakra	is	a	location	at	which	a	number
of	 energetic	 channels	 (tsa)	 meet.	 Different	 meditation	 systems	 work	 with	 different
chakras.	

channel	 (Tib:	 rtsa;	 Skt:	nadi).	 The	 channels	 are	 the	 “veins”	 in	 the	 system	 of	 energetic
circulation	 in	 the	body	 through	which	stream	the	currents	of	 subtle	energy	 that	 sustain
and	vivify	life.	The	channels	themselves	are	energetic	and	cannot	be	found	in	the	physical
dimension.	 However,	 through	 practice	 or	 natural	 sensitivity,	 individuals	 can	 become
experientially	aware	of	them.

chöd	(Tib:	gcod).	Literally,	“to	cut	off,	to	cut	through.”	Also	known	as	the	“expedient	use
of	fear,”	and	the	“cultivation	of	generosity,”	chöd	 is	a	ritual	practice	meant	to	remove	all
attachment	to	one’s	own	body	and	ego	by	compassionately	offering	all	that	one	is	to	other
beings.	 To	 this	 end,	 the	 practice	 involves	 an	 elaborate	 evocation	 of	 various	 classes	 of
beings	 and	 the	 subsequent	 imaginal	 cutting	up	 and	 transformation	 of	 the	 practitioner’s
own	body	 into	objects	and	 substances	of	 offering.	Chöd	uses	melodious	 singing,	drums,
bells,	and	horns,	and	 is	generally	practiced	 in	 locations	 that	 incite	 fear,	such	as	charnel
grounds,	cemeteries,	and	remote	mountain	passes.

Crossing	Over	(Tib:	thod	rgal	[tögal]).	One	of	the	two	main	parts	of	Dzogchen	practice.
The	emphasis	is	on	integrating	with	all	that	arises.	Tögal	utilizes	the	visonary	practices	of
dark	retreat	and	sun	and	sky	gazing.

Cutting	Through	(Tib:	khregs	chod	[trekchöd]).	One	of	the	two	main	parts	of	Dzogchen
practice.	The	emphasis	is	on	cutting	through	all	distractions	and	obscurations	in	order	to
abide	in	the	natural	state.

dharma	(Tib:	bon,	chos;	Skt:	dharma).	A	very	broad	term,	dharma	has	many	meanings.	In
the	context	of	this	book,	dharma	is	both	the	spiritual	teachings	that	ultimately	derive	from
the	Buddhas	and	the	spiritual	path	itself.	Dharma	may	also	mean	“existence”	and—usually
when	used	in	the	plural—“phenomena.”

dharmakaya	(Tib:	bon	sku,	chos	sku;	Skt:	dharmakaya).	A	buddha	is	said	to	possess	three
bodies	 (kayas):	 dharmakaya,	 sambhogakaya,	 and	 nirmanakaya.	 The	 dharmakaya,	 often
translated	 as	 the	 “truth	 body,”	 refers	 to	 the	 absolute	 nature	 of	 the	 buddha,	 which	 all
buddhas	 share	 in	 common	 and	 which	 is	 identical	 with	 the	 absolute	 nature	 of	 all	 that
exists:	 emptiness.	 The	 dharmakaya	 is	 non-dual,	 empty	 of	 conceptuality	 and	 free	 of	 all
characteristics.	(See	also	sambhogakaya	and	nirmanakaya.)

Dzogchen	(Tib:	rdzogs	chen).	Great	perfection,	great	completion.	Dzogchen	is	considered
the	 highest	 teaching	 and	 practice	 in	 both	 Bön	 and	 the	 Nyingma	 school	 of	 Tibetan
Buddhism.	 Its	 fundamental	 tenet	 is	 that	 reality,	 including	 the	 individual,	 is	 already
complete	and	perfect,	 that	nothing	needs	 to	be	 transformed	 (as	 in	 tantra)	or	 renounced
(as	in	sutra),	but	only	recognized	for	what	 it	truly	 is.	The	essential	Dzogchen	practice	is
“self-liberation”:	 allowing	 all	 that	 arises	 in	 experience	 to	 exist	 just	 as	 it	 is,	 without
elaboration	by	the	conceptual	mind,	without	grasping	or	aversion.

gong-ter	 (Tib:	 dgongs	 gter).	 Mind	 treasure.	 In	 Tibetan	 culture	 there	 is	 a	 tradition	 of



terma:	sacred	objects,	texts,	or	teachings	hidden	by	the	masters	of	one	age	for	the	benefit
of	the	future	age	in	which	the	termas	are	found.	The	tantric	masters	who	discover	terma
are	known	as	 tertöns,	 treasure	 finders.	 Terma	have	been	 and	may	be	 found	 in	 physical
locations	such	as	caves	or	cemeteries	or	in	elements	such	as	water,	wood,	earth,	or	space.
They	may	also	be	received	in	dreams	and	visionary	experience,	or	found	directly	in	deep
levels	of	consciousness.	The	latter	case	is	known	as	gong-ter,	mind	treasure.

guardian	(Tib:	srung	ma/	chos	skyong;	Skt:	dharmapala).	Guardians	are	male	or	 female
beings	pledged	to	protect	the	dharma	(teachings)	and	the	practitioners	of	the	teachings.
They	may	be	worldly	protectors	or	wrathful	manifestations	of	enlightened	beings.	Tantric
practitioners	generally	propitiate	and	rely	upon	guardians	associated	with	their	lineage.

jalus	 (Tib:	 ’ja’	 lus).	 Rainbow	 body.	 The	 sign	 of	 full	 realization	 in	 Dzogchen	 is	 the
attainment	of	the	rainbow	body.	The	realized	Dzogchen	practitioner,	no	longer	deluded	by
apparent	substantiality	or	dualisms	such	as	mind	and	matter,	releases	the	energy	of	 the
elements	that	compose	the	physical	body	at	the	time	of	death.	The	body	itself	is	dissolved,
leaving	only	hair	and	nails,	and	the	practitioner	consciously	enters	death.

karma	 (Tib:	 las;	 Skt:	karma)Karma	 literally	means	 “action,”	 but	more	broadly	 refers	 to
the	law	of	cause	and	effect.	Any	action	taken	physically,	verbally,	or	mentally,	serves	as	a
seed	 that	will	 bear	 the	 fruit	 of	 its	 consequences	 in	 the	 future	when	 the	 conditions	 are
right	for	its	realization.	Positive	actions	have	positive	effects,	such	as	happiness;	negative
actions	 have	 negative	 effects,	 such	 as	 unhappiness.	 Karma	 does	 not	 mean	 that	 life	 is
determined,	but	that	present	conditions	always	arise	from	past	actions.

karmic	trace	 (Tib:	bag	chags;	Skt:	vasana).	Every	 action—physical,	 verbal,	 or	mental—
undertaken	by	an	individual,	if	performed	with	intention	and	even	the	slightest	aversion	or
desire,	 leaves	 a	 trace	 in	 the	 mindstream	 of	 that	 individual.	 The	 accumulation	 of	 these
karmic	traces	serves	to	condition	every	moment	of	experience	of	that	individual,	positively
and	negatively.

kaya	(Tib:	sku).	The	word	has	numerous	meanings.	 In	 the	context	of	 this	book	 it	means
“body”	or	“dimension	of	experience.”

khandro(Tib:	mkha’	‘gro	ma;	Skt:	dakini).	The	Tibetan	equivalent	of	dakini	is	khandroma,
which	 literally	means	“female-sky-traveler.”	“Sky”	refers	to	emptiness;	the	dakini	travels
in	that	emptiness,	that	is,	she	acts	in	full	realization	of	absolute	reality.	A	dakini	can	be	a
human	woman	who	has	realized	her	true	nature,	or	a	non-human	female	or	goddess,	or	a
direct	manifestation	of	enlightened	mind.

kunzhi	 (Tib:	 kun	 gzhi;	 Skt:	 alaya).	 In	 Bön,	 the	 kunzhi	 is	 the	 basis	 of	 all	 that	 exists,
including	the	individual.	It	is	not	synonymous	with	the	alaya	vijnana	of	Yogacara,	which	is
more	 akin	 to	 the	kunzhi	namshe	 (see	 below).	 The	 kunzhi	 is	 the	 unity	 of	 emptiness	 and
clarity;	of	the	absolute	open	indeterminacy	of	ultimate	reality	and	the	unceasing	display	of
appearance	and	awareness.	The	kunzhi	is	the	base	or	ground	of	being.

kunzhi	namshe	(Tib:	kun	gzhi	rnam	shes;	Skt:	alaya	vijnana).	The	kunzhi	namshe	 is	 the
basic	consciousness	of	 the	 individual.	 It	 is	 the	“repository”	or	“storehouse”	 in	which	the
karmic	traces	are	stored,	and	from	which	future	experience	arises.

la	(Tib:	bla).	Soul.	Basic	human	goodness.	Fundamental	virtuous	capacities	of	a	species.

lama	 (Tib:	 bla	 ma;	 Skt:	 guru).	 Guru	 literally	 means	 “heavy,”	 laden	 with	 enlightened
qualities	(buddha	guna).	Lama	means	“nothing	higher.”	Lama	refers	to	a	spiritual	teacher,
who	is	of	unsurpassed	importance	to	the	student	practitioner.	In	the	Tibetan	tradition,	the
lama	 is	 considered	 to	 be	more	 important	 even	 than	 the	 buddha,	 for	 it	 is	 the	 lama	 that
brings	 the	 teachings	 to	 life	 for	 the	student.	On	an	ultimate	 level,	 the	 lama	 is	one’s	own
buddha-nature.	 On	 the	 relative	 level,	 the	 lama	 is	 one’s	 personal	 teacher.	 However,	 the
term	lama	is	commonly	used	as	a	polite	form	of	address	for	any	monk	or	spiritual	teacher.

lhundrup	 (Tib:	 lhun	 grub).	 Spontaneous	 perfection	 or	 spontaneous	 presence.	 In
Dzogchen,	referring	to	the	ceaseless,	spontaneous	manifestation	of	phenomena.

loka	 (Tib:	 ‘jig	rten;	 Skt:	 loka)	 .	 Literally,	 “world”	 or	 “world	 system.”	Commonly	 used	 in
English	 to	 refer	 to	 the	six	 realms	of	cyclic	existence,	 loka	 actually	 refers	 to	 the	greater
world	 systems,	 one	 of	 which	 is	 occupied	 by	 the	 six	 realms.	 (See	 “six	 realms	 of	 cyclic
existence.”)



lung	(Tib:	rlung;	Skt:	vayu,	prana).	Lung	is	the	vital	wind	energy,	commonly	known	in	the
West	by	its	Sanskrit	name,	prana.	Lung	has	a	broad	range	of	meanings;	in	the	context	of
this	 book	 it	 refers	 to	 the	 vital	 energy	 upon	 which	 both	 the	 vitality	 of	 the	 body	 and
consciousness	depend.

marigpa	(Tib:	ma	rig	pa;	Skt:	avidya).	Ignorance.	The	lack	of	knowledge	of	the	truth,	of
the	base,	the	kunzhi.	Often	two	categories	of	marigpa	are	described:	innate	ignorance	and
cultural	ignorance.

naga	(Tib:	klu;	Skt:	naga).	Serpent	spirits,	associated	with	water.

ngön	 dro	 (Tib:	 sngron	 ‘gro;	 Skt:	 purvagama).	 Preliminary.	 Usually	 refers	 to	 the
preliminary	practices	of	various	kinds,	depending	on	the	level	of	teaching.

nirmanakaya	 (Tib:	sprul	sku;	Skt:	nirmanakaya).	Nirmanakaya	 is	 the	“emanation	body”
of	the	dharmakaya.	Usually	this	refers	to	the	visible,	physical	manifestation	of	a	buddha.
The	term	is	also	resonant	with	the	dimension	of	physicality.

nirvana	(Tib:	mya	ngan	las	‘das	pa;	Skt:	nirvana).	The	transcendence	of	all	suffering.	The
term	 is	 given	 different	 emphasis	 in	 the	 various	 schools	 of	 Bön	 and	 Buddhism.	 It	 is
generally	understood	in	contrast	to	samsara,	conditioned	existence	subject	to	sorrow	and
pain.

pho	wa	(Tib:	‘pho	ba).	The	transference	of	consciousness.	Usually	refers	to	the	practice	of
consciously	transferring	the	consciousness	out	of	the	body	at	death.

prana.	See	lung.

rigpa	 (Tib:	 rig	 pa;	 Skt:	 vidya).	 Literally,	 “awareness”	 or	 “knowing.”	 In	 the	 Dzogchen
teachings,	rigpa	refers	to	the	innate,	primordially	pure,	non-dual	awareness,	which	is	the
true	nature	of	the	individual.

rinpoche	 (Tib:	 rin	 po	 che).	 Literally,	 “precious	 one.”	 An	 honorific	 widely	 used	 in
addressing	an	incarnate	lama.

rushen	 (Tib:	 ru	 shan).	 Separation	 or	 distinction.	 In	 this	 book,	 refers	 to	 preliminary
Dzogchen	practices	meant	to	divide,	in	experience,	the	nature	of	mind	from	the	ordinary
conceptual	mind.

samadhi	(Tib:	ting	nge	‘dzin;	Skt:	samadhi).	Any	one	of	many	various	states	of	meditative
awareness	or	trance.

samaya	(Tib:	dam	tshig;	Skt:	samaya).	Commitment	or	vow.	Commonly,	 the	commitment
the	practitioner	makes	in	connection	with	tantric	practice	regarding	behavior	and	actions.
There	are	general	vows	and	vows	specific	to	particular	tantric	practices.

sambhogakaya	 (Tib:	 longs	 sku;	 Skt:	 sambhogakaya).	 The	 “enjoyment	 body”	 of	 the
buddha.	The	sambhogakaya	is	a	body	made	entirely	of	light.	This	form	is	often	visualized
in	tantric	and	sutric	practices.	In	Dzogchen,	more	often	the	image	of	the	dharmakaya	 is
visualized.

samsara	 (Tib:	 ‘khor	 ba;	 Skt:	 samsara).	 The	 realm	 of	 suffering	 that	 arises	 from	 the
occluded,	dualistic	mind,	where	all	entities	are	impermanent	and	lack	inherent	existence,
and	where	all	sentient	beings	are	subject	to	suffering.	Samsara	includes	the	six	realms	of
cyclic	 existence,	 but	 more	 broadly	 refers	 to	 the	 characteristic	 mode	 of	 existence	 of
sentient	 beings	 who	 suffer	 through	 being	 trapped	 in	 the	 delusions	 of	 ignorance	 and
duality.	Samsara	ends	when	a	being	attains	full	liberation	from	ignorance.

sem	 (Tib:	 sems;	 Skt:	 citta).	 One	 of	 the	 many	 Tibetan	 terms	 for	 “mind.”	 Sem	 is	 often
translated	as	“conceptual	mind,”	and	refers	to	the	moving	mind	rather	than	the	nature	of
mind.

Shenla	Odkar	 (Tib:	 gShen	 lha	 ‘Od	 dkar).	 Shenla	 Odkar	 is	 the	 sambhogakaya	 form	 of
Shenrab	Miwoche,	the	buddha	who	founded	Bön.

Shenrab	Miwoche	(Tib:	gShen	rab	Mi	bo	che).	Shenrab	Miwoche	was	the	nirmanakaya
Buddha	that	founded	Bön,	and	is	traditionally	believed	to	have	lived	seventeen	thousand
years	 ago.	 There	 are	 fifteen	 volumes	 of	 the	 biography	 of	 Shenrab	Miwoche	 in	 the	 Bön
literature.



shunyata	 (Tib:	 stong	 pa	 nyid;	 Skt:	 shunyata).	 Emptiness.	 The	 absolute	 nature	 of	 all
phenomena.

six	realms	of	cyclic	existence	(Tib:	rigs	drug).	Commonly	referred	to	as	“the	six	realms”
or	“six	lokas.”	“The	six	realms”	refers	to	six	classes	of	beings:	gods,	demi-gods,	humans,
animals,	hungry-ghosts,	and	hell-beings.	Beings	in	the	six	realms	are	subject	to	suffering.
They	 are	 literal	 realms,	 in	 which	 beings	 take	 birth,	 and	 also	 broad	 experiential	 and
affective	bands	of	potential	experience	that	shape	and	limit	experience	in	our	current	life.

sok	(Tib:	srog).	The	life-force,	vitality.	Closely	related	to	the	innate	awareness,	rigpa.

sutra	 (Tib:	 mdo;	 Skt:	 sutra.)	 The	 sutras	 are	 texts	 composed	 of	 teachings	 that	 came
directly	from	the	historical	Buddha.	The	teachings	of	the	sutras	are	based	on	the	path	of
renunciation	and	form	the	base	of	monastic	life.

tantra	 (Tib:	 rgyud;	 Skt:	 tantra).	 Tantras	 are	 teachings	 of	 the	 Buddhas,	 as	 are	 sutras.
Many	tantras	were	rediscovered	by	yogis	of	the	terma	tradition	(see	discussion	of	terma
under	gong-ter).	 Tantras	 are	 based	 on	 the	 path	 of	 transformation	 and	 include	practices
such	as	working	with	 the	energy	of	 the	body,	 the	 transference	of	 consciousness,	 dream
and	sleep	yogas,	and	so	on.	Certain	classes	of	tantras,	of	the	non-gradual	transformation
path,	may	also	contain	teachings	on	Dzogchen.

Tapihritsa	 (Tib:	 Ta	 pi	 hri	 tsa).	 Although	 considered	 an	 historical	 person,	 Tapihritsa	 is
iconographically	 represented	 as	 a	 dharmakaya	 Buddha,	 naked	 and	 without	 ornaments,
personifying	 absolute	 reality.	 He	 is	 one	 of	 the	 two	 principal	 masters	 in	 the	 Dzogchen
lineage	of	the	Zhang	Zhung	Nyan	Gyud.

three	 root	 poisons	 (Tib:	 rtsa	 ba’i	 nyon	 mongs	 gsum;	 Skt:	 mulaklesha).	 Ignorance,
aversion	and	desire,	the	three	fundamental	afflictions	that	perpetuate	the	continuity	of	life
in	the	realms	of	suffering.

tigle	 (Tib:	 thig	 le;	 Skt:	 bindu).	 Tigle	 has	 multiple	 meanings	 depending	 on	 context.
Although	usually	translated	as	“drop”	or	“seminal	point,”	in	the	context	of	the	dream	and
sleep	 yogas	 tigle	 refers	 to	 a	 luminous	 sphere	 of	 light	 representing	 a	 quality	 of
consciousness	and	used	as	a	focus	in	meditation	practice.

tigle	nyag	chik	(Tib:	thig	le	nyag	cig).	The	single	sphere,	a	symbol	of	existence	without
edges	or	divisions.	The	non-dual	nature	of	all	reality.

togäl.	See	Crossing	Over.

trekchöd.	See	Cutting	Through.

trul	 khor	 (Tib:	 ‘khrul	 ‘khor;	 Skt:	 yantra).	 Literally,	 “magical	 wheel.”	 Special	 yogic
practices.	A	practice	of	physical	posture,	movement,	breathing,	and	meditation	meant	to
redirect	the	prana	into	the	central	channel.	The	yoga	clears	obstacles	in	the	body,	energy,
and	mind	and	promotes	health.	Its	ultimate	purpose	is	to	use	the	body	and	the	energies	of
the	body	as	a	support	for	the	stabilization	of	the	practitioner	in	the	non-dual	awareness	of
rigpa.

tsa.	See	channels.

tsa	lung(Tib:	rtsa	rlung).Yogic	practices	that	utilize	the	channels	(tsa)	and	vital	energies
(lung).	 This	 is	 a	 broad	 category	 and	 includes	 many	 practices	 in	 all	 Tibetan	 tantric
traditions.

tse	(Tib:	tshe).	Life-span;	the	potential	length	of	our	life.

tummo	(Tib:	gtum	mo;	Skt:	candali).	The	yoga	of	the	inner	fire.	A	yoga	that	uses	physical
postures,	 breathing,	 and	 visualizations	 to	 activate	 the	 inner	 fire,	 the	 fire	 prana,	 in	 the
navel	 chakra	 and	 bring	 it	 up	 the	 central	 channel	 to	 the	 crown	 chakra.	 The	 practice	 is
famous	in	all	sects	of	Bön	and	Tibetan	Buddhism.	It	is	the	central	yoga	in	the	Six	Yogas	of
Naropa	and	in	other	systems.	In	Bön,	it	is	often	combined	with	the	trul	khor	(see	above).

yee	(Tib:	yid;	Skt:	manas).	The	functional	mind	as	opposed	to	the	nature	of	mind.	One	of
many	Tibetan	terms	referring	to	various	aspects	of	mind.

yidam	 (Tib:	 yi	 dam;	 Skt:	 [ishta]-devata).	 The	 yidam	 is	 a	 tutelary	 or	 meditational	 deity
embodying	an	aspect	of	enlightened	mind.	There	are	four	categories	of	yidam:	peaceful,



increasing,	powerful,	and	wrathful.	Yidams	manifest	in	these	different	forms	to	overcome
specific	negative	forces.

yi	ge	(Tib:	yi	ge).	Written	language,	word,	syllable,	character.

yogin(Tib:	rnal	‘byor	pa;	Skt:	yogin)	A	male	practitioner	of	meditative	yogas	such	as	the
dream	and	sleep	yogas.

yogini	(Tib:	rnal	‘byor	ma;	Skt:	yogini).	A	female	practitioner	of	meditative	yoga.

Zhang	Zhung	Nyan	Gyud	(Tib:	Zhang	zhung	snyan	rgyud).	The	Zhang	Zhung	Nyan	Gyud
is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 important	 cycles	 of	 Dzogchen	 teachings	 in	 Bön.	 It	 belongs	 to	 the
upadesha	series	of	teachings.

zhine	 (Tib:	 zhi	 gnas;	 Skt:	 shamatha	 ).	 Calm	 abiding,	 tranquility.	 The	 practice	 of	 calm
abiding	uses	focus	on	an	external	or	internal	object	to	develop	concentration	and	mental
stability.	Calm	abiding	is	a	fundamental	practice,	the	basis	for	the	development	of	all	other
higher	meditation	practices,	and	necessary	for	both	the	dream	and	sleep	yogas.



BIBLIOGRAPHY
Although	 there	 are	 many	 texts	 about	 the	 elements,	 I	 have	 drawn	 particularly	 on	 the
following	in	writing	this	book.

Drung-mu	 gcod-chen.	 Published	 in	 1973	 by	 Tsultrim	 Tashi	 and	 the	 Tibetan	 Bonpo
Monastic	Centre,	New	Thobgyal,	H.P.	India.	This	cycle	of	teachings	originated	with	Stong-
rgyung	mthu-chen,	 a	Bön	master	 of	 the	 eighth	 century.	 The	 teachings	 flourished	 in	 the
thirteenth	 century,	 transmitted	 by	 the	 master	 Gsen-gsas	 lha-rje.	 The	 particular	 text
dealing	with	the	elements	in	this	cycle	of	teachings	is	the	‘Byung-ba’i	bcud-len.

Sgron-ma	 drug	 [The	 Six	 Lamps]	 and	 ‘Od-gsal	 sems-kyi	 me-long	 [The	 Mirror	 of	 the
Luminous	 Mind]	 are	 two	 texts	 found	 in	 the	 Zhang	 Zhung	 Nyan	 Gyud	 cycle	 of	 Bön
Dzogchen	teachings.	These	texts	were	published	in	a	collection	titled	History	and	Doctrine
of	 Bon-po	 Nispanna-Yoga 	 by	 Prof.	 Dr.	 Lokesh	 Chandra	 and	 Lopon	 Tenzin	 Namdak
Rinpoche	in	1968.	The	publisher	was	the	International	Academy	of	Indian	Culture	in	New
Delhi.

Gshen-rtsis	 las	 nag-rtsis	 skor	 [Elemental	 Astrology]	 by	 Gsen	 mkhas-grub	 tshul-khrims-
rgyal-mtshan	 together	 with	 Nag-rtsis	 of	 Khyung-sprul	 ‘jigsmed-nam-mkha’i-rdo-rje.
Published	by	Tibetan	Bonpo	Monastic	Centre,	New	Thobgyal,	H.P.	1973.

Brda’	 sprod	 kun	 gyi	 snying	 po	 srid	 pa’i	 sgron	 me	 bzhugs,	 by	 Lama	 Khyung	 Trul	 Jigme
Namkhai	Dorje.	The	text	was	published	the	Tibetan	Bönpo	Foundation	in	1966.	It	is	a	book
of	Bön-po	grammar.	In	it,	the	alpha	bet	and	sounds	are	related	to	the	elements.

The	 Three	 Basic	 Mother	 Tantras	 with	 Commentaries	 [Ma-gyud],	 by	 Rgyalgshen	 mi-lus
bsam-legs.	Published	by	the	Bonpo	Monastic	Centre,	Dolanji,H.P.	in	1971.

Recommended	books	in	English:

A	very	helpful	book	 in	English	 is	Drung,	Deu	and	Bön:	Narrations,	Symbolic	Languages
and	the	Bön	Tradition	in	Ancient	Tibet	by	Namkhai	Norbu	Rinpoche.	Dharamsala,	 India:
Library	of	Tibetan	Works	and	Archives,	1995.

Other	books	by	Tenzin	Wangyal:

The	Tibetan	Yogas	of	Dream	and	Sleep.	Ithaca,	NY:	Snow	Lion	Publications,	1998.

Wonders	of	the	Natural	Mind.	Ithaca,	NY:	Snow	Lion	Publications,	2000.



tiger 										 east	(closer	to	northeast)
hare 										 east	(closer	to	southeast)
dragon 										 southeast
snake 										 south	(closer	to	southeast)
horse 										 south	(closer	to	southwest)
sheep 										 southwest
monkey 										 west	(closer	to	southwest)
garuda	(rooster) 										 west	(closer	to	northwest)
dog 										 northwest
pig 										 north	(closer	to	northwest)
rat 										 north	(closer	to	northeast)
elephant	(ox) 										 northeast

The	Twelve	Astrological	Signs	and
Their	Directions

This	is	a	list	of	the	astrological	signs	used	in	determining	the	direction	that	offerings	are
made,	as	described	in	the	text.	The	signs	are	correlated	with	the	year	of	birth,	following	a
twelve-year	cycle.	The	years	are	based	on	a	lunar	calendar.

Each	 sign	 is	 related	 to	 a	 direction.	 In	 the	 Tibetan	 system,	 the	 cardinal	 directions	 are
divided	into	“upper”	and	“lower”	directions.	The	tiger,	for	example,	is	associated	with	the
east,	but	closer	to	the	northeast,	while	the	hare	is	east	but	closer	to	the	southeast.	This
allows	for	twelve	directions.

The	 sign	 opposite	 the	 birth	 sign	 is	 considered	 the	 most	 likely	 direction	 from	 which
negative	forces	will	approach.	Thus	the	offering	is	thrown	or	placed	in	the	direction	of	the
opposite	sign.	To	determine	which	sign	to	use,	count	your	sign	as	one,	then	continue	the
count	to	seven.	That	is	your	opposite	sign.

For	 example,	 anyone	 born	 in	 the	 year	 of	 the	 dragon	 would	 place	 the	 offering	 to	 the
northwest,	the	direction	of	the	dog,	which	is	the	opposite	of	the	dragon.

In	the	Chinese	tradition,	the	Bön	year	of	the	garuda	is	known	as	the	year	of	the	rooster,
and	the	year	of	the	elephant	is	known	as	the	year	of	the	ox.

	



CONTACTS
U.S.A.

CHARLOTTESVILLE,	VA

Ligmincha	Institute	(headquarters)

P.O.	Box	1892

Charlottesville,	VA	22903

Telephone:	434-977-6161	fax:	434-977-7020

E-mail:	Ligmincha@aol.com

Website:	http://www.ligmincha.org/

(Articles	supportive	of	the	elements	practice	can	be	ordered	from	this	website.)

HOUSTON,	TX

Ligmincha	of	Texas

4219	Richmond,	Suite	216

P.O.	Box	541479

Houston,	TX	77254

Telephone:	713-621-7430

E-mail:	dreddy@dreddy.com

Website:	http://zentekconsulting.com/sangha/

BERKELEY,	CA

Laura	Shekerjian

1500	Holly	St.

	

Berkeley,	CA	94703

E-mail:	lauras@majornet.com

LOS	ANGELES,	CA

Bob	Anger

924	Idaho	Ave,	#7

Santa	Monica,	CA	90403-2957

Telephone:	310-369-4747

E-mail:	RobertA@fox.com

Website:	http://www.math.csusb.edu/faculty/prakash/ligmincha/sangha.html

EUROPE

ITALY

Luca	Violini

Corso	Lodi	34/A



20135	Milano	Italy

Telephone:	39	0255189346

E-mail:	lucviolini@tiscalinet.it

Website:	http://digilander.iol.it/shangshung/shangshung

RUSSIA

Tom	Rabdanov

15,	Bakinskaya	St.	apart.90

Moscow,	RUSSIA,	115541

Telephone:	(7-095)327-7268

E-mail:	rabdanov@mtu-net.ru

Website:	http://bonpo.al.ru/

POLAND

Assocation	of	Garuda	Poland

st.	Pieñkowskiego	5/115

02-668	Warszawa

P.O.	Box	19

PL	00-956	Warszawa	10

Poland	(Polska)

Telephone/fax:	48	(22)	8495930

E-mail:	bon@ourobos.pl

Tomasz	Szymoszyn	at	yonten66@hotmail.com

Website:	http://dzogczen.budda.pl/

GERMANY

Garuda-Bon

Telephone:	0049(0)5042-959213

Fax:	0049(0)5151-923064

E-mail:	Dorthea	Mihm	at	mihm@praxis-adarsha.de

Stephanie	Wagner	at	StephWagner@gmx.de

Andreas	Wehowsky	at	awehowsky@aol.com

Website:	http://www.garuda.net.de/

THE	NETHERLANDS

Bon	Garuda	Foundation	Holland

Amsterdam

E-mail:	Dr.	Jan	Dinkelaar	at	info@bongaruda.com

Website:	http://www.bongaruda.com/

MEXICO



Amatlan	24

Col.	Condesa

Mexico,	D.F.	06140

Telephone:	(52)	5286-9913

E-mail:	Garuda@prodigy.net.mx

Website:	www.garudamexico.org

OTHER	BÖN	CENTERS

INDIA

Menri	Monastery

Under	the	direction	of	His	Holiness	Lungtok	Tenpai	Rinpoche

P.O.	Kotla	Panjola

Via.	Oachghat-Solan

H.P.	173223

India

E-mail:	menri@nde.vsnl.net.in

Website:	http://www.tibetanbon.com/

NEPAL

Triten	Norbutse	Monastery

Under	the	direction	of	Lopon	Tenzin	Namdak

Ichangu,	Teen	Ghare,	Ward	#6

G.P.O.	Box	4640

Kathmandhu,	Nepal

E-mail:	triten@wlink.com.np

FRANCE

Association	Yungdrung	Bon

2,	rue	de	Blainville	75005

Paris,	France

Telephone:	06	60	90	76	00

Contact:	Sébastien	Doerler	at	spheric@magic.fr

Website:	www.yungdrung-bon.org

ENGLAND

The	Tibetan	Yungdrung	Bon	Study	Center	U.K.

Building	16,	The	Lincolnsfield	Centre,

Bushey	Hall	Drive,	Bushey,	Herts.

WD2	2ES,	UK

Telephone:	01923	228858,	Fax:	0207	4331299



E-mail:	tybsc@care4free.net

Website:	http://www.yungdrungbon.com/



The	Prayer	of	the	Intermediate
State:	The	Precious	Garland

(‘Byung-ba’i	lcud-len)





Table	of	Contents
Title	Page

Snow	Lion	Publications

Contents

Frontis	Page

Dedication	Page

Preface

The	Prayer	of	the	Intermediate	State

Introduction

The	Bön	Religion

ONE:	The	Elements

Three	Levels	of	Spiritual	Practice

External

Internal

	

Secret

Relating	to	the	Sacred

The	Five	Pure	Lights

The	Dissolution	of	the	Elements

Understanding	Through	the	Elements

Relating	Oneself	to	the	Elements

Earth

Water

Fire

Air

Space

The	Elements	and	Our	Well-Being

How	the	Elements	Become	Unbalanced

The	Arising	of	Problems

Purification	and	Cultivation

Knowing	Which	Element	to	Work	With

Working	with	the	Elements

Choosing	the	Level	of	the	Practice

TWO:	The	Five	Elements	in	Shamanism

La,	Yee,	and	Sem



La,	Sok,	and	Tse

Practices

Working	with	the	Elements	in	Nature

The	Nine	Purification	Breaths

Earth

Water

Fire

Air

Space

Dedication

Elemental	Spirits

Relating	to	Non-Physical	Beings

First	Guests

Second	Guests

Third	Guests

Fourth	Guests

Making	Offerings

Soul	Loss	and	the	Retrieval	of	the	Elemental	Energies

The	Arrow,	Turquoise,	and	Soul	Deer

The	Practice	of	Retrieving	the	Elemental	Energies

Outline	of	the	Practice

The	Nine	Purification	Breaths

Guru	Yoga

The	Four	Guests

The	Transformation	of	the	Body

The	Transformation	of	the	Energy

Retrieving	the	Elemental	Energies

The	Transformation	of	the	Mind

The	Long	Life	Mantra

Dedication

The	Goddess	Practice	with	the	Other
Elements

The	Practice	in	Daily	Life

THREE:	The	Five	Elements	in	Tantra

The	Horse,	Path,	Rider,	and	Armor

The	Horse:	Prana

The	Functions	of	the	Five	Pranas



The	Path:	Channels

The	Rider:	Tigle

The	Armor:	Syllables

Aspects	of	Tantra

Chakras

Positive	and	Negative

Supporting	Positive	Qualities

The	Practice	of	Tsa	Lung

Posture

Breath	and	Prana

Transformation	in	Holding	and	Releasing

Instructions

The	Five	External	Tsa	Lung	Movements

The	Five	Internal	Tsa	Lung	Practices

The	Five	Secret	Tsa	Lung	Practices

Opening	the	Chakras

FOUR:	The	Five	Elements	in	the	Great	Perfection

The	Great	Perfection

Creating	Samsara

The	Six	Lamps

Sound,	Light,	and	Rays

Being	with	Problems

Dissolving	Samsara

Appreciating	the	Space	Element

Integrating	with	Space	and	the	Other	Four	Lights

The	Dark	Retreat:	Visions	of	the	Five	Elements

FIVE:	Final	Words

Glossary

Bibliography

Appendix	1

Appendix	2

Appendix	3




